Dear Friend, I AM sensible the World will esteem a Friend too Partial a Judge
of the performance of a Friend, yet since I am satisfied that I can divest my
self of all prejudice against the Writings of even an Enemy, and allow him that
praise which Justice requires; I think I may with the greater assurance say,
that I will give no more favorable Censure on this Play of yours, than the
severest Critic ought, if he but regulate himself according to the merits of
the Cause, and will let Reason, and the Rules of Art weigh more with him, than
the inconsiderate Railings of some of your Enemies, or the ungenerous malice of
others; who, because they have attempted the Province of Comedy with less
success, think to regain their Credit by Damning every one that has the Art of
Pleasing beyond them; and since they cannot arrive to the Excellence of the Old
way of Writing, would advance a new one of their own production, adapted to
their undesigning Genius

But that which is the most strange is, that some of our Critics, like
Juglers, stare us in the face, and Palm upon us their own Fancy for the Opinion
and Practices of the Ancients, and persuade us that a Bundle of Dialogues was
all that was ever required to the framing a good Play; and that Terence had no
other Excellence but the neatness of Phrase. Either they never read that Poet
themselves, or suppose no body else did; otherwise I cannot imagine how they
can maintain so gross a falsity, which may so easily be contradicted, by a
^^ort view of the Plots of his Comedies: I will begin with his first, called
^^dria

Pamphilus the Son of Simo, debauches Glyceriam the supposed Sister of Chrysis
( a Native of the Island of Andros) she proves with Child, and he infinitely
enamored of her, promises her Marriage, with a full Resolution to be as good
as his word; but Chremes won with the good Character and Parts of Pamphilus,
proposes his Daughter Phileumena, for his Wife to Simo; the Old Men agree, and
settle the Preliminaries* the Wedding day approaches, but the death of Chrysis
the supposed S^^ter of Glycerium intervenes; Pamphilus, Simo, and others being
at the Funeral, Glycerium distracted with grief, had flung her self in the
Burning-Pile, had no^ her Lover Pamphilus run to her rescue; but he with such
ardour embraced and comforted her, that the Old Gentleman his Father, and the
rest of the Spectators had shrewd suspicions tha^ ^his care of her proceeded
from ill disguised Love; Chremes with a great deal of indignation breaks off
the Match; but Simo, willing to find out the truth of the matter, conceals it
from his Son, assuring him he must prepare to be immediately Married. Pamphilus
is at a great loss what to do, 'till his Servant Davus persuades him to
dissemble a seeming readiness to comply with his Father's will; but this Policy
of Davus had like to have spoiled all, for on his Sons Compliance, Simo soon
pacifies Chremes, and so set the Wedding on foot again, which Pamphilus finding
no way to obstruct, Davus takes care to have the Child of Glycerium by
Pamphilus exposed to the view and knowledge of Chremes; who, upon that, once
more in a great fury breaks off the match; but after a great deal of
disturbance, all settles in quiet, to the content of all Parties. For Crito the
next ^kin to Chrysis, arrives at Athens, to take Possession of her Goods as her
lawful Heir, and discovers Glycerium to be Pasibula, the Daughter of Chremes,
who overjoyed at the discovery, gives her to Pamphilus for Wife, and Philumena
to Charinus, who had long been in love with her, and who makes another Person
in the Play

To have given a larger Argument of this Comedy, would have been too tedious,
since here is enough to ^atisfie any one that Terence had something else in his
eye, besides the purity of his Language; otherwise Horace had with small reason
given him, in his first Epistle of his second Book to Augustus, the distinctive
Character, that his excellence lay in his Art

Plautus ad exemplar siculi properare Epicharmi,
Vincere Caecilius gravitate Terentius Art.
I may spare the pains of taking notice of his Eunuch, or Adelphi, since the
Town has seen them both, under the names of Bellamira, and the Squire of
Alsatia. In his Heautontimorumenos, the several Designs of Chremes on
Menedemus, and Syrus on both; the Discovery of Antiphila to be the Daughter of
Chremes, and Sostrata, the Plot and Contrivance of Syrus to get the Money for
Bacchis, and the disappointment of all these Designs, just when almost brought
to perfection, will show, that none that ever read him could in justice say he
had no Plot or Intrigue in his Plays: Nay, his Hecyra, which is said to have
met with but little applause, and is doubted by some as spurious, is not
without a good Plot, and several turns. But i^ would be superfluous to run
through all particulars of this, and the other of Phormio, since by what is
already said, there is nothing so evident, as that Terence took care of Plot as
well as words, and was not less skilled in the Protasis, Epistatis, Catastasis,
and Catastrophe, than in the Dialogue, or Discourse

But were it true, that Terence wanted this perfection, as they would have it
yet I can see no reason but that this Excellence should be valued; for the end
of Comedy, being for Pleasure, as well as Instruction; that certainly which
contributes most to the first, without prejudice to the latter, must be
acknowledged an accomplishment not to be slighted. For the several neat turns
of a Play keep the minds of the Auditory employed with expectation, hope, and
desire, which all end in satisfaction, at the conclusion or unravelling of the
Plot. But let the Moral or Instructive part be never so well writ, the Language
never so fine, yet if the Action goes on without any Plot to divert us, we see
through all at first sight, and grow weary before the Play is half done, for it
gratifies none of our Passions, without which there can be no pleasure

By what has been said, will appear that you, Sir, keep up to the noble
Standard of the Ancients, and though it be one of the greatest and most di^^icult
parts of the hard task of a Comic Poet, yet you have always been very
fortunate in it, especially in this last Comedy of yours, called the
Marriage-Hater Matched. I must needs say I think is your best, and far beyond
that of the Boarding School; the turns are so surprising, and natural, that I
may say without flattery, it is not in the power of any Person to outdo them.
The wit of Sir Philip and the Widow, like sprightly Blood in youthful Veins,
runs through the whole Play, giving it a Noble and vigorous Life; you have
farther observed that decorum of Poetic Justice, in making Sir Philip be
caught in his own Plot, to deceive another, and marry her, who had so well
merited him, as Ph^be, alias Lov^^e^^, who made a very pretty Figure on the
Stage. Such a variety of Humors and Characters I have seldom seen in one Play;
and those so truly drawn, that they all look like principal Parts; and that
which is more, they are all New, and so worthy observation: that indeed I
admire the humor of Madam La Pupsey has been so long neglected, since grown to
so general a custom, that the Lap Dog takes up all the thoughts of the fair
Sex, whilst the faithful Lover sighs in vain, and at a distance unregarded.
This was an usurpation on our Prerogative, and had been born too long. The
humor of Van Grin is new, and not so unpleasant, but that it deserves to be
more taken notice of, being very material to set off the rest

Then the Skittishness of Mrs. Margery, and the ^reakishness of Berenice, are
faults too general not to be exposed; besides, who is there so wedded to
Melancholy, like the Son of the Emperor Philip ^he First, but must give way to
Laughter, to see the pleasant Humor of Bias, and the extraordinary diversion
of Solon

I am sensible that Callow was so like the Life, that the Rot me Sparks openly
declared their dissatisfaction at the Satyr: but it is a sign it hit them, when
they complain of the wound. It Is a base and ill-natured, as well as ignorant
Age of Chriticism, when the Virtues of a Play shall be Arraigned as Defects;
for if these Gentlemen understood either the Original, or end of Comedy, they
would never quarrel with the Satyr of it, since from its beginning 'twas
designed to correct Vice, and Folly, by exposing them

Little had the Poetic harmony of Orpheus contributed to the benefit of
Mankind, by calling the Humane Salvages from their rude way of living, to
Society, if Comedy had no^ come in to reform those abuses which grew from
Conversation; Necessity indeed was its Mother, for the Follies and Vices of the
City as well as the Country, grew beyond all other Redress, which made the
Country People (to whom we owe too the Beucolic Poetry) when they Celebrated
their Festivals to Apollo Nomius, for the preservation of the Fruits and
Products of the Earth, in songs and Madrigals recriminate on those that had
abused them: From this beginning, they made another step, and in the night time
they frequently entered the City, and exposed such of the more Opulent and
Remarkable Citizens, as by their Vanities or Oppressions had rendered
themselves j^stly odious; here they proceeded to a particular ennumeration of
the wrongs they had received, and the ills which they had suffered under. The
Magistrates and Government observing that this Course was more Powerful than
the Laws for the restraining of Vice, and that the fear of the loss of their
Reputation, kept those from ill, that could perhaps evade the Penalties of the
Laws by Money, or Favor; granted a formal License for the performing this in
the day time in Verse, from thence Comedy immediately derives it self, which at
first, like our Lam^oons, feared not to mention the very names of those it
would expose. Cratinus was the first that divided into distinct Parts, or Acts;
and Aristop^anes brought it to a more Regular and Complete Form; the liberty
and bold assuran^e of this first state of Comedy, Horace in his Fourth Satyr of
his First Book, shows us in these Five Verses

Eupolis, atque Cratinus, Aristophanesque Poetae
Atque alli quorum Comaedia Pri^^^ virorum est,
Si quis erat dignus describi, quod Malus aut fur
Quod Maechus foret, aut Sicarius, aut alioqui
Famosus, multa cum liberate notabatur.
But the Thirty Tyrants of Athens being themselves so guilty of all manner of
Vices, thought they could not better secure themselves in the practice of them,
than to gain a Liberty for others to come in for their share, that by the
multitud^ of Offenders, they might be the less observed; but they knew no way
to effect their desire, but by taking away this Liberty of Comedy, which kept
the Citizens in awe, and within the bounds of Justice; wherefore they
established a Law, that any one that should find himself exposed on the Stage,
might sue for Satisfaction. This pleased the Wealthy ones so well, that after
Expulsion of these Usurpers, Athens preferred this Sanction which so much
indulged their Inclinations; so that from this time the Chorus was left off in
Comedies, for in them chiefly was names of particular Persons, with their
Crimes recited. Horace seems to approve of this Alteration, in these words

Successit vetus his Comaedia non sine multa
Laud, sed in vitium libertas excidit, and vim
Dignam lege regi; lex est accepta Chorusque
Turpiter oblicuit, sublato fure nocendi.
But still the Business of Comedy was to expose the general Vices and Follies
of the Age, under feigned Names: So that to eccept against your Play, for the
Satyr of it only, shows your Enemies are wretchedly put to it to find a real
fault in it, when they condemn that which is an Excellence, without which, the
Poet gains but half his point, losing the Utile, which i^ an essential part of
his Design and Duty

But if you could meet with generous Enemies, they would forgive those Errors
their quicker sight might dis^over, for the Beauties and delightful
Entertainment of the Lyric part, the Songs I mean, in which I think there is
none will (I am sure none ought to) dispute your Title to the Pre-eminence

If there be any fault in this Play, it is that which few are guilty of; that
is, there are too many good Characters, too full of Humor, a very pardonable
failing, which only proceeds from Vari^ty, the life of Pleasure and Wit, though
that gave it the disadvantage of seeming too long the first days Acting, though
the Stage's being thronged with Spectators, did not a little contribute to the
imperfect Acting of it, which accidental Misfortunes concurring with the
Endeavors of an opposite Faction, must needs have damned it, had it not by the
Force and Vigor of its own Worth, raised it self the second day with the
general Applause of all that saw it. Horace thinks it a sufficient proof of a
good Poem, if it will bear a second view; Haec placuit semel, haec bis repetita
placebit
But the Marriage-hater went further, and in spite of all the disadvantages i^
labored under of Action and Aud^ence, pleased on, after several times
Repetition, and will as long as Wit, Humor, and Plot shall be esteemed as
necessary Materials to compose a good Play. Which have given me so great a
Satisfaction both in the Reading and Seeing, that I must beg you, to give me
leave, to attest it to the World

Who am, Your Friend, and Humblest Servant, CHARLES GILDON.




SCENE, The Park near Kensington. The Space, Thirty Hours.

GOod Morrow to my sweet Contriver, thou dear Lifeblood of my Design, how goes
our Business forward


Why just like that of a needy Client, who has a knotty Cause and no Fee to
give, the Stars we used to brag of, Sir Philip, have failed us in this
Juncture, damnably


Black Clouds, and Fogs of rank envenomed Fenns, eclipse 'em for it, I say, but
prithee, my little Engine^r, how have they failed? hah, what has this Devil of
a Widow over-reached us again, are the Writings come from Hambourgh


Most certainly, and by another Hand than we expected.


Another Hand, who, prithee?


Why, by what I could discover by the glimpse I had of him, and by listening in
the next Room, I find him to be a Man of more Bulk than Brain; in short, a
Swagbelly'd Flanderkin, a Nephew to our old Knight, Sir Lawrance, in Quality of
Fortune recompensed with Fifteen hundred a Year, but in the Quality of Brain
and Sense, nothing; a very Devil of a Lover, as indeed all that Nation are; and
yet I find, for all that, the Blockhead comes hither a wooing


And so this Blockhead, with a Pox to him, has frustrated all ou^ Wit, hah.


It seems so, for the Widow has been so alarmed with the loss of the Three
thousand pounds worth of Jewels, which you by my Industry have lately got from
her; that she has cunningly prevented our Design upon the Writings, and so
underhand, ordered this Nephew, who you must know, has a design upon her
Person, to secure 'em from you, and bring 'em over, he happening to lodge in
the very House where her Husband, Sir Solomon died


It Is always so; put a Trick upon any Widow, that does not return it e're a
Twelvemonth ends, and you may conclude the Devil's grown weary with Obliging
her Tribe, quite tired with the crow'd of their Intolerable Mischiefs. Prithee
what is to be done? -- God's Death, must I lose an Estate of Seventy thousand
Ducats so ridiculously


Was your deceased Friend real to ye? are you sure there is no flaw in the Will?
Pray tell me the story once more; I ought to have that repeated once a day, to
refresh my Brain for the more subtle contriving


With all my Heart, to begin then, as I told thee before, Sir Solomon Subtle
being my Bosom intimate and entire Friend, going, about two Years since, with
me, to visit this beautiful Devil, my then Mistress, fell so desperately in
Love with her, that his strange disquiets were every day more and more visible
to me; I knew his Generosity and Love to me, made him disguise it as well as he
could, but falling sick, at last was forced to own it; you may guess how I was
puzzled in the business, much to my love was due, and much to my Friend, till at
last, resolved to help him as much as in reason I could, I urged to him this
friendly Proposal, that he should have a Months time fairly to solicit her, at
the end of which, he that she chose should marry her, whilst the unfortunate,
refused, disposed himself to Travel; he as he had great reason, giving me a
world of Thanks, consents, and fits himself against the time of trial


This was a strange proof of Friendship, I confess.


'Twas so, and done merely to save his Life, that when refused, Travel might
ease his Sorrows, for I confess I thought my self secure, but see the Mischief
of a Woman's Nature; my Friend, that but a Month's short space had wooed her,
succeeds when I least thought, by her free choice, and I who best deserved,
disgraced and slighted


This was Levity indeed, and you may rail with Reason. --


My Friend, Sir Solomon, upon this, according to Agreement, Marries her, and
has in Portion Seventy thousand Ducats, and afterward in return of the
generous Friendship I had shown him, publicly declared, That, dying without
Issue if I survived, he would by Will bequeath his Wife and all her Fortune to
me


A pretty kind of Legacy.


He being of a weakly Constitution, in short time after dies a^ Hambourgh, as
he was taking possession of another Estate just left him by an Uncle there, for
she, a young, fresh, buxom, active, Bona Roba, had so outdone him in the
business Conjugal, that the Soul unable to supply the Body, forced it self out,
to seek for rest elsewhere


Oh, pray let that Business alone, and come to your own.


In short then, the Will was made as he had promised, and I named joint
Executor with her, as I was credibly informed by a true Friend, that since
unluckily was killed at Sea, who reported too, that I was left Heir to the
other Estate given by his Uncle, so that I being Ignorant of any Witness, and
without possession of the Deeds, could never right my self


But, pray what cause have you e're given the Widow to make her so Inveterate?


Why, I guess the main and chiefest Cause is thy self, thou know dear Phaebe.


Lovewell, if you please in this Habit, Sir.


Dear Lovewell, then, that ever since the Widows Jilting me, I Have had a strange
Antipathy to Marriage, which (not my want of Love) has been the cause of my not
doing thee the common Justice, in recompensing that dear Virgin Treasure, thou
gav'st up to my Arms


If I should talk to ye of my little Boy, now, 'twould set me a crying, and
you would but laugh at me


Well, let him alone then to his Rattle and Bells, and observe me; this Venial
Ship of mine, the Widow, has been told of, and her proud Spirit finding my
aversion to wear my Friend's old Boots, I mean, her self, resolves to balk me
of my Executorship, and keep the Writings close, though the late ^^wels were by
thy Wit unknown to her surpised


I think that was sub^ly enough managed, to snap the Messenger with the Casket,
just within sight of the Lodging, and wheedle him to yours


'Twas a Masterpiece -- and if thou can but get the Writings too. --


You see I have played my part well too, to get my self in this habit, into the
Family, and Sir Lawrance's favor, with pretending to be a Relation of her you
had debauched, who was his Kinswoman, this looks with a lucky face: What say
ye, will you be good and marry me, if I get what you desire


Can thou doubt it? why then we shall have enough to make us, easy, Child.


Why then smile Fate, whilst I my wit pursue,
For such a Fortune, such a Husband too,
What will not a Maid in my Condition do?

Right, but we must have two words to the bargain for all that, Child: It Is a
good natured loving Tit, and of my Conscience, the wittiest Baggage that ever
told a lie t'excuse her Lover; her Father was an honest Country Parson, the
Offspring of which Sect, by the way I Have observed, seldom or never fails to be
good ones; and he had so cloyed her with musty Morals and lukewarm scraps from
the old Patriarchs, a Diet so disagreeable to a young Wenches Constitution,
that she, like a Gudgeon, snapt at my first Bait; nor was there need of a Hook,
the Creature was so greedy: Well, if she does trick this Widow, and get the
Writings, she will deserve extremely well of me; but Marriage is such an
unreasonable reward for an Estate, that it is like giving a Man means to
purchase variety of Delicates, and at the same time, obliging him to chaw upon
one Rump of Beef all his life time


What, Sir Philip, my eyes dazzle sure, it is impossible!


Hoh! my noble Man of War! welcome on Shore. But why impossible, Friend? what
wonders do thou find


Thee in this place, the Park, so near the Air of Kensington, and yonder place
of Terror the Widow's Lodgings


Oh, Sir, your Widow, like a Ship just returned from a Sea sight, can do little
or no hurt upon a second Attack, she has spent all her Artillery upon the first
Engagement


She rails at thee most dreadfully, and blushes through her Mourning when thou
art but named, as the Sun does through a Cloud when a Summer Shower is falling


Her Mourning? why has the Snake then batten'd in the skin of her Hypocrisy so
long? and does the demure Peak oppress the Forehead still? the Devil's in her;
why this is quite contrary to a Widows Policy. she should have new washed and
furbish'd up the Premises long before this for a new Comer; when the Bill
stands too long upon the door, it is sign the Tenement's not worth Letting


Ha, ha, ha, I have heard of your Whoring too, Sir, she has told us all within
yonder


Ay, and would have told thee of her Husband's Cuckoldom too, as well, if she
had not a design to draw another into the noose


No, a Pox on it, this is malice, all the World allow her to be virtuous.


They allow her to be proud indeed, and consequently ill natured, and reserved,
Virtue is a rank Chea^ in most of the Sex, when once a Woman's Pride promotes
her Chastity, her Virtue is the greatest Vice she has


How now, Lieutenant, has to got an answer?


Yes, Sir, and a pleasant Story to tell you that belongs to it.


Speak softly; another time for that, yonder is your Uncle.


Sir Philip, your most humble Servant.


So Cozen, I see you're equipped well, your Commission like your Scarf too sits
close to ye, your Sword too of good dimension, but I am told your heart is loose
in the hilts, and though you wear the King's name in your Pocket, you herd with
those that hate his Government


Who I, Uncle? he is the Son of a Whore that told ye so, let me but know him,
and rot me, I Will make him eat the Sword you speak of; nay, not only the Sword,
but the Hilt, the Knot, the Scabberd, the Chape, the Belt, and the Buckles,
Broil me


And why that Rakehelly Cant of Rot me, Burn me, Broil me? Art thou afraid thou
shall not dye and be damned soon enough


Custom, faith Uncle, Custom, besides I think Rot me, Sink me, Burn me, Broil
me, etc. are as pretty Tags to a Soldiers disco^rse, tha^ would be thought a
brave Fellow, as odsniggs and sincerely are for a Citizen that intends to cheat
under the notion of the Pious; this is my opinion, Rot -- O Lord, 'twas comi^g
again


No, it is the Scoundrel Company you keep, such as the young ^op Lord Brainless,
then they say you are always stewing at my fat Lady Bumfiddle's, and so great an
Admirer of that eternal Mill-clapper, Mrs. La Pupsey, that you pay Homage to
her very Lap-dog


Never rallied her but once in my life, sink me -- 'twas a coming again; it is
true, I Have an honor for my Lady Bumfiddle, because --


Because she is the best Procurer in Town; hush, not a word, lest the Captain
hear us, but look to it, for though as my Kinsman, I would not willingly see thee
hanged


I humbly thank ye, Uncle.


Yet, Sir, I Would cut your Throat, to save your Credit.


Would ye so, Sir, I should not thank ye very much for that tho, Rot me, -- O
Lord, there 'twas out


Well, my dear Captain, I can find by the fold of that Paper, the Shore is like
to engage thee some time here, and therefore thou have the more leisure to tell
me, what News abroad, how stands our Public Affairs, bravely, hah


As heart can wish, friend, the Turk will get no more ground in Hungary, the
French King no more in Flanders, the Sweed will get nothing by his Neutrality,
the Irish and Scotch make no more Rebellion; the English Fleet will no more
stand out in Action, nor the French Victual themselves again with our Mutton


Spoke like a true English heart of Oak, gad I see success in thy very look,
I Am sure we shall beat 'em, but who are these coming down the walk yonder


One of 'em is Sir Lawrance Limber, I Am sure I know the Old Scoundrel by his
Chollerick motion


And 'tother his Nephew, newly come from Hambourgh, his Name they tell me is
Mine here van Grinn, and ro^ me, it is very well applied, for he does nothing but
grin and make faces all the while he is talking, they say he is Son to a Great
Senator there, but he is a Blockhead for all that, sink me


I must play the Bucket with him, and vanish when he appears, there is reason
for it -- Adieu, Friend, thou shall know more another time.


And so Uncle, as I was telling ye, ha, ha, ha, ha -- it is a very good jest
faith, the Widow, the Widow, ha, ha, ha, pray mind me Uncle, after I had showed
her the Writings, which she had such a plag^y mind you must know to keep from
this Sir Philip, what does she do, ha, ha, ha, ha, it is a very good jest faith,
what does she do Uncle, but brings me down into the Parlor


Well, what then -- where is the jest of that?


Why I Will tell ye, ha, ha, ha, if you will have but patience, it is a very good
jest faith, taking me there into a Corner, after I had brushed her over the
Lips with a Flemish buss or so, ha, ha, ha -- Sir, says she, with a low
Courtesy, you are welcome to England, do you mind me Uncle, ha, ha, ha, it is a
very good jest faith


'Oons let us hear it, it is very long a coming, prithee let us hear this jest.


Why presently, Lord what hast^ you're in, 'dsfish do you think a jest like an
Old Man's Marriage, is done without Consideration; ha, ha, ha, there I was with
the Old Scoundrel sharp, faith and troth


Oh Pox, nay if you expect I Will stay fo^'t 'till the Sun sets, good buy to ye,
your Servant Captain Darewell


Sir Lawrance I am yours.


Why here it is then, come the Captain shall hear too, ha, ha, ha, ha, it is a
very good one faith, I must desire ye, Sir, says she, to convey the Writings,
do you mind me Uncle, to Mr. Splutters my Husband's Councellor, to supervise
them, ha, ha, ha, for says she (mind me) Uncle you that were employed by my
Husband, are most fit to be entrusted by me your humble Servant


A Plague, and what of all this, the jest, the jest Man!


The jest, why I Have a design to marry her, ye Old Skellum, (Old Gent. I mean)
and to save me the trouble of Courting, she meets me half way, and, though a
Widow, trusts me with her Writings, ha, ha, h^, ha, is not that a plaguey sign,
faith and troth


Not of a jest, by the Parliament, though I have been waiting an hour for it.


Of her Love, man, there is the jest, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Ah! the Low-Co^n^ry Fogs cho^k thee for a dull Rogue, love thee, hark'e -- she
neither loves thee one jot, nor is there any jest in it at all, by the
Parliament


No jest, that is a good one faith, ha, ha, ha, wha^ say you Captain, no jest?


I am expecting, Sir, I have set my face this half hour.


Expecting, the jest is flown to Per^assus top by this time, ha, ha, ha, pray
Sir, what is your Opinion?


I have not seen the glimps of a Jest to day, Rot me.


Unless grinning, gaping, and making of Sarrazen-faces be a jest, Captain will
you believe m^, I swear by the Parliament, you know my Oath when I Am serious,
bu^ that I knew his Father who was my Brother, I should believe that his Mother
was intimate with some Baboon, and he were the effect of her unnatural
Conception


A merry Man, Sir Lawrance, I see he is always in humor.


Merry, a pox on him, he is not merry neither; it is true, one would think that
when a Man laughs he should be merry, bu^ it is otherwise with him, for this
Fool shall grin at any thing, and as much when he is Cudgel'd, as when he is
Complemented -- the least ^rifle will do it, as for Example now.


Ha, ha, ha, ha -- very good jest I faith, Captain, look upon my Uncle's bald
pate there, and the Spectacles, ah poor Nuncle, halloo, halloo, halloo, there
went the Hair away, ha, ha, ha


Ah the Devil take thee, what a damned pun the Rogue has found out!


^^oy ^^me, the Old fellow looks very Commically, but I will not laugh, because he
has a Rich young fool to his Daughter, that I Have a Design upon


Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Do You see Captain, a senceless Rogue, do you mind him, an ignorant Puppy, to
stand grinning all this while at the Honorable Emblem of Age and Experience --
and to dare to be saucy with me too, I Have no more patience, I Will Cudgel him.

Captain stand by a little, and you shall see me break three of his Ribs, I Will
do it, by the Parliament, I Am serious


Oh, you must not strike here, Sir Lawrance, it is too near the Court, and will
look like ill manners


'Od^so, you are in the right, troth Captain, I have been a Courtier this Fifty
years, and never waged my Finger out of order yet, but I Will manage you another
way, friend -- You get a Widow with that Flanderkin Owl's Phiz? No fool, my two
Sons come to Town to day from Shrewsbury, Bias and Solon, Bias can tickle up a
Widow as she ough^, he shall have her I Am resolved on it, by the Parliament he
shall, I Am serious


Now by this Oath of his can'^ I perceive whether this Old Sarab be for
Monarchy, or the Commonwealth


Oh ^^o^l him, for Monarchy without doubt, you heard him say he has been an Old
Courtier


That I had forgot, indeed.


Ha, ha, ha -- So Uncle, you say your Son Bias shall carry the Widow, a very
good jest says, but that is as she and I shall agree Uncle; the Widow has
already some feeling knowledge of my part, she has Uncle, ha, ha, ha, good
again, she knows what is what Uncle -- the difference between ^ strong portly
able Fellow sit for Service, ha, ha, ha, and a weakly Consumptive Puny (...),
^^e for nothing but to make Sauce of, ha, ha, ha, ha; so that if Bias is not
for her turn Uncle, I hope another may that is better liked, though Bias were as
wise a^ his Namesak^, the Philosoph^r of -- ha, ha, ha, ha


^^ye s^^ Captain, (...), on my Conscience the Rogue will grin if he was at the
Resurrection


O^ no, the ^atigue of Doomsday will make him serious, I warrant ye.


How now Lovewell, who would you speak with?


Sir I come to tell ye that the two young Gentlemen your Sons are arrived, and
being informed by me that you were walked into the Park, are coming yonder to
meet ye


Are they come, that is well, now Captain pray observe my Son Solon, my Son Bias
is the Elder, it is true, a pretty brisk Blade, but my Son Solon has a head ^it
or a Statesman, sollid, sollid, Solon's a prodigious Fellow


There Is some wonderful virtue in this Solon sure.


I Will hold any Man a Dutch Ducket he is a Coxcomb, sink me.


Now Buffle look to your self, here is one coming will quickly put your Nose out
of joint with the Widow I warrant ye.


What, while she trusts me with her Writings, that is a very good jest faith,
ha, ha, ha


Trust him with the Writings, that is well, this was a lucky discovery, and I Will
manage it accordingly, you shall have more Waiters than you expect, my jolly
Flanderkin.

But no more of this at present, here comes the other brace of Boobies.


Bless ye, bless ye, y' are welcome to Town, but what is the matter Son Bias?
What ailes your Face


Has the Gentleman bin in some Quarrel?


That Is no matter, let it be as it will, some body shall find he has more than
no body to deal with, my Brother Solon, can tell you more, a Jest is but a
Jest, and every Body is free in the King's Highway, and if I did kiss her,
'twas no more than she deserved, and every Gentleman might do, my Brother Solon
can tell you more


A very good Jest faith; see how Solon looks, ha, ha, ha. Dam him, I knew he
must be a Coxcomb


What have you been in a Scuffle, since you came to Town, how came your
Brother's head broke Solon


Why, truly Father, my Brother Bias was, as one may say, somewhat saucy with a
Centry that belonged to that great House yonder


'Slife the Court, my heart trembles within me, well, go on, ha, ha, ha, ha.


There came by a young Woman, you must know, with a Basket of Straw-berries, a
fringed laced cocking, topping, rowzy, frowzy young Woman, as a Man may say,
and as I told you before, with a Basket of Straw-berries


Ha, ha, ha, -- I Will put in and interrupt him, so Cousin Solon, and what then
-- a very good Jest faith, as a Man may say, Solon, why, if ye are my Cousin,
that may be, but I did not indeed tell my Tale to you, I Am talking to my
Father, as a Man may say


You need not be so curious In the matter, let things go as they will, it is but
a head broke, and I Have had as much at Cudgels a hundred times before now, why,
what a-do's here, my Brother Solon can tell you more


'Sdeath, these brace of Fools, are more nauseous than 'tother, I Am sick of
'em already


Heart and Lungs, why do not go on Solon, I Am afraid Captain, the rash Boy,
has affronted some Quality or other about the Court, which, by the Parliament,
I would not he should for a thousand Pound, I Am serious


In short, then my Brother Bias would have gone into that great House with his
Boots on, at which the Centry stops him, at which the young Woman laughs, de'e
laugh, says Bias, I Will buss ye ^or that ^ ^ackins


Mettle to the back, Captain, just so was I my self, in my young days, just so
in troth


So Bias buss'd her whether she would or no, and I vow and swear, I had a huge
mind to be at her my self, for 'twas a curious ^ine Woman, and had the softest,
whitest Neck, as a Man may say


Why, well said Solon, gramercy Solon, Solon's a plaguey Dog at a Wench, I
warrant him, ha, ha


Nay, she need not have squauld and squeak'd at that rate, as if she had been
Ravished, 'twas no such strange matter to her, for I heard 'twas but a
Chambermaid, after all


Gad I Am glad of that however, as I hope to be saved, Captain, I was afraid it
might have bin one of the Maids of Honor, and th^n my Son had bin ruined for
ever, he had, by the Parliament, now I Am serious


This Sottish old Fellow, is as great a Dunce as his Sons, Rot me.


And so in short, Bias ru^^led the Woman, and the Century broke his head for it.


You have hit it in troth, Father, as a man may say.


The Centry hit it, you mean, Solon, a very good jest again, faith there are
your wits, Nuncle, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Now is that grinning Dog in his Kingdom.


Sir, if you are not too busy, I should deliver a Message to you.


From whom, Sweetheart?


The Widow, Sir.


^he Widow, hush, I Will follow thee immediately; she has some new fondness to
show me, I Will be ha^g'd else, ha, ha, ha, ha, a very good jest faith -- Good
buoy N^ncle, my Nose will be dam^ably bored, I see, my Cousin Bias must carry
the Widow, and Solon has a Head ^it for a Statesman, -- ha, ha, ha, ha, Sollid,
sollid


Ah, would thou were hanged that thou --
Might grin to some purpose, by the Parliament.

'Od, if I had thought he mocked me, I would have had a pluck with him, I tell
him, that there should have been more marks in his Fate than his Nose, I tell
him but so


My Brother Solon and I would have shown him some of Shrewsbury play, in faith,
for all my Head's broke


Well, not too much of that, good Bias, no^ to no more of your Court
Saluta^ions, do you hear, -- is no sign of good Breeding, this is only hear of
Blood, Captain, the working of the Annimal Spirits; Youth, Youth, the Boys have
known no Sorrow


No Faith, nor Joy neither, their Dolts are too Insensible; 'dsdeath, what a
blind old Sot is this


'Troth, Captain, I Have a great Care upon me, to know how to dispose of these
Boys; this Bias is a Lewd, Misch^evous, Yo^^g Dog, I design him for an Office


Sot, Rascal, Damn him, what does the Fellow mean?


The Other there shall be a Lawyer, because of his instructing Face* h^'ll be a
Prodigious Fellow, for look ye, Captain, if you mind it, his face will become a
Sergeants Quoif extremely, he will certainly be a prodigious Fellow


A prodigious Fellow, indeed -- Oh the insufferable blindness of a dull Father.


And as for Wives, I have 'em ready for 'em, my Son Bias shall have the Widow,
and my Son Solon her Sister, both swinging Fortunes, by the Parliament


'Ds'death, what says he, her Sister -- my Mistress, by this light.


They Are now at home with my Sister Bu^fiddle: I Will go watch her coming out,
^or I Am resolved to propose it to night; and so my noble Captain, Farewell


Hold, hold, Sir Lawren^^, a word with ye first.


Not for a thousand Pound, Sir, it comes into my head that this is the lucky
minute. Come Bias, farewell Captain, come along Solon, come


Well, if ever I had so much patience since I was born, boil me; why there are
not four such Fools again within the four Seas; sink me, and I hope the
Daughter is as bad


I Am glad the old Coxcomb has told me his design upon the Widow's Sister, I Will
prevent his Sons folly there, I Will warrant him; this Letter from her I hope is
more favorable than the rest, how came thou to get it, she was in a very
good humor sure


Why, my Intimacy in the Family made her Employ me, I believe; besides knowing
that I was coming to ye; but as to her humor, she is no Changeling, 'twas just
at the old rate


What ^reakish, ^reakish! come, before I read her Billet-doux, prithee tell me,
what did she say of me


Why she said you were an Ass, -- Devil take me.


I thank her: well, go on.


She says she believes ye to be one of those fresh water Captains, tha^ was so
purposely blind that you would not see the French Fleet, when they were out,
for fear of fighting, but still laid excuse upon a great Fog


Admirable! ha, ha, ha --


She says she will never believe ye Valiant, till you get a wooden Leg, nor can
ever love ye, till you do one thing for her


What Is that, prithee?


Hang your self: Ro^ me, I thought she was mad: the rest of he^ pretty humor
you will find in the Letter


And without doubt, as good a Comedy as this is a Prologue: Well, I Will go and
rea^ i^ at my better leisure, and afterward visit and teaze her as I see
occasion

Mild ea^^e Love should never be abused,
But you^ mad Mistress must be madly used.

IS my Lady gone, Sister?


Gone, what before she has her Mornings draught, before ^ert hirst is quenched
with one quart Glass, and the quick motion of her tongue ^as dried her up for
another; gone, said ye! no, no, she must have two Bumpers more, and a Dinner
before she goes, I Will secure ye


She Is below in the Parlour, Madam, teaching Sir Lawrances Daughter to keep out
her Toes, and some new Rules of Behavior


Fogh, that is a nauseous Creature too, and indeed ^it to learn of no body but
her, for she has too little tongue, and the the other too much; she lisps and
slobbers ou^ her words like a perfect Changeling, and the the other, with a voice
like a Trump-Marine, is ever bawling in your ears, and running over all ^he
Intreagues of Town and Country, without ^ver breathing between


She Is Tutoring the two Sons I believe too, I hear they are come.


Yes, to your Sorrows -- you will be thronged with Suitors now.


If either of 'em speaks of Love to me, I Will break his head, I hate both them,
and all Mankind


Sir Philip too, Sister, come don't lie.


Would thou were hanged for naming him, that Villain above all the rest has the
ascendant, and with my late poor sneaking fool that is dead, still Plotted to
affront me, but I Will throw off this nauseous Black to morrow; shake off the
Widow, and appear my self gay, ^rolicksome, I Am sure I Have Youth enough, and
Beauty, or my Glass deceives me; what a shame it is that Custom should make us
such Hypocrites to wear this filthy Dress, as a respect to a dull lazy d^one of
a Husband w^ wish would break his neck the next day after our Marriage


Why well said, Widow, but is this Consquent to that wringing of hands, that
storm of sighs, and blood of tears that came from you when first you heard the
News of the good Man's departure to his long home; are these two humour^
suitable


Those tears were suitable to that time, Fool; tears are as natural then, as a
s^ile is to a Lover when we receive a Present, or Flattery to a great
Statesman, from one that designs to beg a Place of him


And they were shed I Will say that for 'em in abundance, sorrow came ^lowing
down in purling streams, and Crystal Rivulets, as the Poets have it, and the
Handkerchief was so wet --


Reason good, Changling, I had an Union tied up in the Corner on'^.


Does your Ladyship never intend to think more of Sir Philip then, I Have heard
you say you did love him once


Ay, and hate him the more for it now, intolerable wretch, in the midst of his
Intrigue with me I discovered the Villain had another that was with Child by
him, upon which in a mad ^it I married this dull Sir Solomon, who was just
dying for me; yet good nature returning afterward to this ungrateful Freewit,
I wa^ contented my Fortune should be settled upon him after the Fool my
Husband's death, provided he behaved himself well to me; but ^'th' contrary, he
insolently disdains it, professes himself a Marriage-Hater, and poorly imagines
his Wit shall get the Writings and Esta^e in spite of me, but I think I have
balk'd him now, for I Have just now sen^ 'em by Sir Lawrence's Nephew to my
Husband's Council here in Town, who is my Creature, to ^ind a ^law in 'em


What, right or wrong, that is a rare Councellor indeed --


Oh prithee mind tying thy stockings up straight, and leave me to the
management of my own affair; a Widow knows as well what to do with her
Writings, after her Husband's death, as thou do with a troublesome Maidenhead
before thou art Married; and prithee, now I think on it, what is become of thy
Sea-Lover, the Captain, hah, have thou sunk him yet


No, he lies at Anchor still, and expects daily when he shall grapple me, but I
cannot leave my old freakish humor for the heart of me, I use him like a dog
sometimes, I cannot help it, faith it is in my Nature


She makes a mere Fool of him, soft, kind, and easy -- as if she would invite
him to Bed to her this minute, and the next cocks up her nose, frowns, calls
him names, and will no more know him, than a new made Judge will a Coun^ry
Attorney, that has ^ormerly treated him at the Nine-pence Ordinary


A Man looks so like a Fool when he makes Love -- that I cannot for my Soul keep
in one humor, and ye^ I like the honest blunt Dog well enough* if I would let
one of the two-leg'd Bears rub their brisles upon my face, i^ should rather be
him, than a Milksop ^lashy Beau a^ any time


Oh here is my Lady and the young Dowdy, now if there be any Intrigues or
Matches stirring about the Town, we shall have 'em, I Am sure --


Widow, I heartily beg thy pardon for being so long from thee, I have been
tormenting my self this hour below in the Parlour, with this awkward fool my
Niece here, hark thee in thy ^ar.


She Is very slippant with my Sister yonder, you see.


^lippant, Lord help her, as I Am a Protestant, Child she cannot speak one word
of sense in a forenoon; ^lippant, shame on her, she makes me distracted; she
can make shift it is true to ask for her Porridge or Watergruel in a morning,
but if a Man do but speak to her, or touch her, then she is presently at her --
Let me alone, will ye? pish, what aileth the Man? fough, cannot ye be quiet?
Aunt, Aunt, the Man squeeseth me, and the like; and then makes more ugly faces
than a Monky that has burnt his mouth with hot Chestnuts; and yet the senceless
Jade is turned of Eighteen too,

An Age when, to my knowledge,

If she have not her Womanly apprehensions about her she, will never have 'em,
as I Am a Protestant


She has a very good Tutor of your Ladyship, I wonder she does not Learn.


Learn, why the thing has no Soul in it, Child, you may sooner teach an Irish
Man the Art of Poetry, as I Am a Protestant. So my little Quintesence of
Conversation, -- what, you are diverting your spleen upon my Niece there


Quite contrary, Madam, for we have been railing at your Ladyship; she says,
last night at play, you would make her let a Gentleman tie on her Garter, though
she always wears'em above her Knee


'Dslife, we were all at Questions and Commands, and he must tie on the Garter
if the King Commands, though 'twere above her Waste, it is the Authority of the
Play, and the Changeling knows it well enough


I find my Lady has been very obedient in her young days.


Well, well, I will not let him though, I will not, and I care not a farthing whether
ever I play again or no, for if ever he comes to touth my Legs, I Will give him a
good dowth of the Chops, let the King ^^y what he will, he shall not touth my Legs


Thant touth your Legs, -- ah M^ukin, thy Husband that is to be, is like to
have a fine time with thee, but indeed 'twould be no great satisfaction to him,
for they are both Crooked. --


Hark'e, tell her, her own are the wrong end upward, she has had neither Ancle
nor Calf this seven Years


O Lord, I Have a good mind I vow and thwear, but that I Am afraid she will plague
me with some thmutty Jest or other, for she has 'em at her Fingers ends, and,
I vow, makes me blush sometimes twenty times a day


What, she is grumbling at me, I warrant, senceless Brute, because I endeavor
to inform her Stupidity, and make her fit


For the Conversation of the Beaux Esprits, Madam. --


For the Business of this World, Child, she should not be afraid of a Man if I
had the ordering her; 'dslife, when I was of her years, no Man durst put a
thing to me, but snap I had him in a moment; I came upon him Sowse, with twenty
Jests one after another, and afterward made him look so like a Fool


Your Ladyships Wit was equal to your bulk, Madam, and it is no wonder the Men
were worsted, for a great Fellow durst no more st^nd the severity of your Jest
than, a little Fellow your Fist, for the one was sure to be outrallied, and the
the other to be knocked down


Nature indeed took care not to stint me in my Dimensions; nor was I backwards
in letting the Men know her benefits, as this Fool is here


Well, well, I care not, the Men thant touth me, I Am retholv'd, I cannot abide
'em; I Will let never a Man in England touth me, but Mr. Thummim our Parthon


The Parson, do you hear her, Madam, for all her Skittishness, this Coy Quenn
shall sit upon the Parsons Lap two hours together, and you know some of those
are plaguey Fellows, for all their demure looks, if she were my Daughter, I had
as lieve trust her with a Dragoon as a Parson, as I Am a Protestant


Pugh, they what you will, I love him for all that, for he teaches me Quethions
and Responthes, and when I was a little Girl he taught me Morning and Night my
Catechize, like a good Man as he is


Ay Child, and now thou art a great Girl, he will teach thee the Matrimony, if
thou will, I warrant him, the good Man will not give over his Devotion, if he
finds thou art worth any thing


Come, prithee let us leave her to her Chalk and Oatmeal,


Pigeons, I think, my Lady, and something else.


Oh, now she is got into her Kingdom, to hear her talk all this while, and
nothing of Eating, Drinking, nor Intreague, has me wonder.


Pigeons, Pox, that is pidling, melancholy stuff; have any Venison, Child?


Venison, Madam, yes, I believe there is.


Prithee, what piece, do know, a Haunch? ha* --


I swear, Madam, I cannot tell that, I Will send to my Cook and know, if you
please; Comode, go to the Cook, and ask him


Do, dear Mrs. Comode, ^only for a fancy; for you must know, I dreamt of a
Haunch last Night, and Mrs. Comode, with your Ladies leave, ^ill my Glass that
I used to drink her Ladiship's health in, and bring it with ye


So, now will she get half drunk, and then if we escape being deaf, we are happy.


Widow, I Have got a Husband for thee, Child, I have been Contriving* --


Oh, Madam, I beg your Ladyships pardon, I Will not marry.


Nay, it is neither to Sir Lawrence's Nephew nor his Son, though I know he has a
design upon thee for the last, but a Young, Brisk, Rich, Active, Handsome, --
'odsli^e, and what is better than all, a Fool too, a rare Boy for a Widow


I warrant your Ladyship knows all the Matches have been made this twenty Years.


Within three, I think, Child -- why* I make most of 'em my self, I get five
hundred pound a Year by it; nay, whether they marry or no, if I can but get 'em
together, it is the same thing


Truly then a Bawd and your Ladyship are not much unlike the same thing, in my
Opinion.


I have observed, Widow, that no Intrigue that I have not had a hand in, has
prospered lately; My poor Lord Spindle, I hear, made an Effort last week upon
Mis Gamboll, an Heiress at Greenwich, but I not being in the Plot, my Lord lost
her: Then Sir John Limber, a great Sportsman of the North, would fain have shot
the Widow Wagbum ^lying, but he gave false Fire without me* my Brother here,
too, for I Am no respecter of Persons, intends to fix his Son Bias upon thee,
Widow, and his darling Solon upon Mrs. Berenice there, but not consulting me,
it shall not do, as I Am a Protestant


Why then I find your Ladyship has a right and title to dispose of me, whether
I will or no


Most certainly, Child.


Pray, Madam, will your Ladyship give me leave to blow my Nose, for I find I
have nothing at my own command


Oh, that you may, witty Mrs. Berenice, freely: Thank'e, good Mrs. Comade, --


Thank your Ladyship; it is a Haunch, Madam, and Colliflowers.


It is, tha^'s well; here, Widow, here is a health to thy merry Thought.


What does she mean?


To be drunk, if she swallows all that, or the Devil's in her.


Deliver me, what is this? -- Egad, Comode, prithee what have thou given me
here? -- Egad. --


Lambeth-Ale, Madam.


Lambeth-Ale, what a plague came into thy Head to give me Lamb^th-Ale?


It Is fresh and good, Madam.


To give one the Gripes, -- Egad, fresh and good, said she; Puddle for Frogs,
as I Am a Protestant, -- go prithee, fill it me with Sherry, Sugar and Nutmeg,
according to the ancient, laudable Custom, Fool


Ha, ha, ha, this Lambeth-Ale has mortified her strangely; go get my Lady some
Sherry, you know what she drinks well enough


If you are given to mistakes thus, Mrs. Comode, you may whistle for your
Gentleman-Ushe^, I Will tell ye that


Prithee stand out of the way, and with my Ladies leave, I Will go and order it
my self


This Baggage has ^inder'd us of all our News.


Oh, no, when she has drunk her Bumper we shall have it with Interest, and
Sister, I see you are like to have more Guests, for there is two Chairs just now
come in


One of 'em carries my young Lord Brainless, I Am sure, for I saw his Page.


Egad, I shall eat no Dinner then: Prithee Sister, why do let that lewd,
nauseous, silly Boy visit thee, it is as bad as a Lampoon to be in's Company


'Dslife, there is no avoiding him, he will visit every body, nor is ev^ry House
su^ficient, but like a Fly he will be buzing in every Corner on it


Just as he uses the Playhouse, from the Box, whip he is in the Pit, from the
Pit, hop he is in the Gallery, from thence, hey pass b^tween the Scenes, in a
moment, where I have seen him spoil many a Comedy, by baulking the Actors
entrance, for when I have eagerly expected some Buffoon to diver^, the first
nauseous appearance has been my Lord


Oh, now I see who is in the the other Chair, it is Mrs. La Pupsey, Madam.


And her Lapdog then, I Am sure, why we shall have ra^e Diversion, we need see
no Play to day, the best Comedy will be acted here, however I Will avoid her as
long as I can; but methinks, Sister, it is ^it you should go and entertain my
Lord


Not I* I Will have none of your Lords, especially such as he is; your Lord is a
Leaden Shilling to me, as the Plain-Dealer says. --


Hey, where are all my Ladies People, here? the Family, methinks, are s^rangely
careless, -- this would be a mortal Crime in France now, we never vi^it there,
but you ^ind a Footman at the bottom of every pair of Stairs, and a Page in
every Room


Your Lordship is the Original of all good breeding, your bell ay^ is
incomparable, and your Address has something in it so soveraignly graceful,
that it surprises extremely; the Cadance of your speech too is soft and
symphonical, but above all, your Lordship's dress is always so a Droite Novelle
and a propos, that as you are the delight of the Beau Monde, you are certainly
the envy of the Beaux Esprits: I have found his French vein, and will
accordingly humor it.


A pr^ty Creature this, but so horribly fortified with the shell of her
Complements, that like a Tortise there is no attacking her before nor behind,
the Devil take me --


I vow I Am pleased extravagantly with your Lordships particularity in your
Stockings to day


Gad, Madam, I must needs own I would not give threepence for Humane Life, but
for the honor of being ^steemed by the Fair Sex, for -- something or other
pretty Mrs. Berenice, yesterday, upon my asking her what Stockings she thought
became my Leg best, told me buff-colour, or yellow -- implying Jealousy;
adding withal this pleasant Conceit, that my Legs would seem as jealous of
their Performance, being to make their Conge to the Merit and Beauty of my
Mistress, which, faith, was well enough said; I think


nay we of the Cabal do allow that Berenice has some wit.


Afterward I asked your Opinion, you know, Madam; and you told me a Pink, upon
which, faith, in pursuance of the French Gallantry, I ^esolve to honor your
judgments, and wear both


Your Lordship's most humble Servant.
He Is very obsequious of late, I hope he will marry me.

All I fear is the young Fellows of the Town will get into the fashion too
soon; for I Am sure it will take prodigiously, it is very particular and new


It Is agreeable with the rest, my Lord, I wish my Lady were here to join with
me in applause, I Will go find her out


By no means, Madam. Sirrah, you Monkey -- what a plague are you asleep; go and
inform my Lady, or rather, Madam, since it is to serve you -- I Will go my self --


His Sense is not the most genuine I have met with, therefore there is the more
hopes I may get him; come my Jewel, come Dony, kiss thy ^own Mistress again
D^ny, and so I will, says he, and kiss her, and kiss her ag^n, says he; what
do you think I Am like my Lord, to spend my time in that and Complement, when I
may ki^s, and kiss, and kiss again a young Lady, says he: Nay, nay, ^ye Dony,
^ye, now you don't kiss ^air, now you lick me Dony, you do, you dear Jewel you.
What then, says he, what if I did, it is no more then I used to do, and no more
than you like neither, says he? ye lie Sirrah, ye lie, ye dear Creature you,
and get ye gone from me


Ah! Jesus, Madam, there is all the world within with my Lady; there is the Old
Knight Sir Lawrence, the Dowdy his Daughter; then there is my fat Lady
Bumfiddle, and the two nauseous unlick'd Cubs the Sons, that gave me the
Vapors at the very sight of 'em, they are all coming, how shall we divert our
selves


I hope they had sense enough to distinguish your Quality, my Lord?


I think they had manners enough to call me, my Lord, indeed, but my dress was
no more regarded, than if I had wore a Cloak; they took no more notice of my
Stockins, than if a fool had wore 'em, the Devil take me


The Spirit of dullness had possessed 'em sure; hah, what think thou, Jewel?
thou would have treated my Lord better, I Am sure: Yes, says he, that I
would, I know a Man of Quality when I see him, says he, yes that he does,
that is my Dony, that is my life, umph Mistress loves thee at her none heart
root.


A delicate Dog indeed* Madam; come hither, pretty Creature: Pray what is his
name


Adonis, my Lord, -- Oh fie, fie, Dony, where are your manners, what be rude to
my Lord; go, go, kiss him, and love him, and tell him a pretty Story, and ask
his Lordship how he does, and when he kissed his Mistress last, do you hear Dony,
that is my Jewel


This is as extravagant a language as her other, I Will try to imitate her -- And
if you can ask Questions, you can answer, Dony, who is your Bedfellow, Dony?
where did you lie last night, you happy Creature you? with my pretty Mistress,
says he, between her white soft melting -- Arms, says he, where many an honest
Gentleman would be glad to have been, says he: Well, Dony, but what Moles has
your Mistress, Dony, h^h? you dear Creature


Pish, I will not tell ye, says he: O fie, my Lord, you shall have him no longer,
you teach the Dog paw things, and you cannot imagine what an apprehension the
dear Creature has -- I vow, I believe it is not impossible to teach him French,
for I was saying to him the other day, En ^assant, Monsi^ur le Chien, je suis
vosre tres humble Servant, and I vow, to my thinking, turning about with a
French Grimace, Mademoiselle dit il, je suis vot Servitur^, plainer than any
Gascoign can speak it by far


Miraculous! And in the right French tone too, Madam?


Tone! nay, my Lord, never a Dog in Christ^ndom hits a note like him, he sings
a Minuet after me perfectly, I Will try if he be in humor. Sing, Dony, come sing
my Soul, my Life, -- come -- Thol, Lol, Lol,

That Is my none comfort, come then, sing then, Dearest.

Indeed, my Love, says he, I do the best I can, umph, umph, umph, sweet
Creature, -- your Lordship might observe the note was in alt, though a little out
of Tune, and hoarse -- the poor Rogue has got a desperate cold


As all good Singers generally have, Madam.


Right, my Lord, you should have heard it else in perfection, he does not aim
to a Quirester yet, but he sings much better than the Clerk of any Parish


To six my self more in your good grace, Madam, and knowing how tender your
esteem was for him, I have caused some words of mine to be set on that purpose,
where I envy his happiness, and wish my self in his condition, for to be so
carressed by you, must be the extremity of happiness, that is most certain: but
sirst, if you please, I Will treat you with an Italian Air


I vow your Lordship honors us both extremely, but him in a more particular
manner, but I beseech your Lordship add another to us, and let us hear it.


With all my Soul, Madam, umph, thol, lol, lol; ah pox of ill luck, here is the
deluge breaking in upon us, '^is impossible whilst they are here to do justice
to any Music


Speak to her Bias, and Solon, don't be afraid, I Will stand by ye; what my
Estate may encourage ye s^re to speak to as good as they; push on I say, brisk,
brisk, you must always push briskly to a Widow, she will not care a fig for ye
else; to her Boy, to her Bias -- and Solon, a plague what art thou a doing,
thou look as if thou were rather going to hang thy self, than make Love --
why to her Sirrah -- to he^ I say, let us hear a little wit


Well, Sir, what News?


News, Gad sooks, I never read any News, Madam, I founder like a Spavin'd Mare
when I r^ad a Gazet; but I can tell ye this, that I love ye damnably; and if
you would do as much for me, as the Song says, you should be my Delight, both
by Day, and by Night


Well, Sir, and what say you?


I cannot say much, but I Have a great mind to be married, as a Man may say, and
methinks, and you have the purest Neck and Bubbies that ever I saw, as I hope
to be saved, hey, ho, I wonder what a Clock it is


What a Clock it is, 'oons what a question's there, I believe the Boy's
bewitched, methinks he has no wit at all now, Captain


No, nor luck neither, Sir, he shall cross the Old Proverb for once, shall I
beg a word or two, Madam


About what, the Deck, Fore-Castle, and Gun-Room; oh, I Am not at leisure now,
good Captain


The Devil's in her, what new freak is this now --


Come, Sister, here is a New Song my Master taught me this Morning; my Lord you
have Skill, pray tell me how you like these Notes -- umph, umph --


Peace my Jewel, peace Dearest.

Dony humbly begs your pardon, Madam; but when any one begins to Tune, it is his
way, and he has so great a passion for Music, he cannot forbear


Here Is no notice of my Stockings yet, a pox take 'em.


HOw vile are the Sordid Intreagues of the Town,
Cheating and Lying perpetually sway;
From Bully and Punk, to the Politic Gown,
With Plotting and Sotting, they waste the day:
All our Discourse is of Foreign A^fairs,
The French and the Wars
Is always the Cry,
Marriage alas is declining,
Nay though a Poor Virgin lie Pining,
Ah curse of this jarring, what luck have I?
I thought a young Trader by Ogling Charms,
Into my Conjugal Fetters to bring,
I planted my Snare too for one that loved Arms,
But found his Design was another thing:
From the Court Province, down to the dull Citts,
Both Cullies, and Wits of Marriage are shye,
Great are the Sins of the Nation,
Ah shame on the wretched Occasion,
Ah Curse of the Monsieur, what Luck have I?
A pretty air, I like the Song too better than those I usually hear, because
there is no whining Love in it; a Latin Sermon, and a Love-Song influence me
equally; the one touches my heart no more, than the other my apprehension


A Latin Sermon, pray, Madam, don't speak irreverently of that, I never miss
the Chapel when Bishop what do you call him Preaches; for the very sake of
hearing 'em -- that man has really the most Elegant way of Sermocination, and
his words so plain, without needing a Periphrasis, that Madam, I could tell you
such a Story --


Oh prithee Mrs. what do you call, no Stories now, but let us have a little more
Music, I say


Ridiculous absurdity; come, my Lord, my Lady Bumfiddle's within, we'll have
the Story there


Age forgets becoming Complaisance, Madam, you must excuse him -- hey Page,
where is my blockhead now?


Upon your shoulders, if I may give my Opinion.


This was barbarous in the Old Knight.


Ay, to hinder her in the very Convulsion fit of her harangue, she will choke
with it, but see, the nuisance is not thoroughly cleared, here is the Lovers
remaining yet


I have seen variety of Fools, but never two so very ridiculous before, and yet
is that Old Fellow as fond of 'em, as if they were as wife as their Namesakes
of old -- Strange stupidity of Humane Nature; the Beasts of the Field, and Birds
of the Air, that chance to produce monstrous Births will soon loath and desert
'em; but a dull Father shall indulge and dote upon a couple of Changlings, though
the shame of Creation, and that were given him as a punishment for some
horrible Sin


He Is laboring for something, Madam, I see the pangs are very strong upon him.


I know he would fain bluster something to me now, but makes more. Grimaces
about it, than one that has a real stuttering imperfection if he were compelled
to read a Welsh Bible, I Will have pity, and relieve him sor once: A pretty Suit
that you have on, Sir


Yes, Madam, I beg your pardon, I think I Have a pretty good Tailor, I have not paid
him his Bill though, but the Cloth cost twenty Shillings a yard; my Gloves cost a
Guinea, and my Hat three Pounds; I beg your Pardon, Madam.


I think I Have the most harmless Lover that ever was, he is asking me pardon at
every word he says; he broke both his shins over a great form in the Hall just
now, and asked me pardon for it, as if he had broke mine


Are you then resolved to affront me --


Pish, Lord, you are so troublesome; now does his tongue itch to speak to me
about the Letter; but I must play another freak with him if I were to be hanged


Oh, Bias is at her, I see; the young dog will succeed, on my Conscience --
your right Widows love an impudent young Fellow, and the Rogue's as lewd as
her heart can wish; but methinks Solon lags behind all this while: To her,
Solon, at her again, Sirrah -- Why see if he stirs now -- it is so -- the boy's
bewitched -- by the Parliament he is, I Am serious --


You like the Song then, you say, Sir Lawrence.


Very well in troth, Madam, 'gadso, well remembered, faith, I Will make Solon sing
a Song to her, that she may see he has variety of parts -- Madam, my Son Solon
too admires your voice so much, that he resolves to return his thanks in the
same kind; come, begin Solon -- now is your time Sirrah, now Solon


I can sing none, but one about hunting; I learned it of Nick Stitch the Cobbler
in Shrewsbury; a very merry Fellow I Will say it, and had the purest roaring
voice, 'twas louder than any Pack of Dogs in the Country; but for my part, I
could never come up to him, as a Man may say


'Sbud no more prating, but Sing, as a Man may say; thou art as hard to be got
to it, as a good Singer indeed, come start fair, three hems, and away


TAntivee, tivee, tivee, tivee, high and low,
Hark, hark, how the merry merry Horn does blow
As through the Lanes and the Meadows we go;
As Puss has run over the Down:
When Ringwood, and Rockwood, and Jowler, and Spring,
And Thunder and Wonder made all the Woods ring,
And Horsemen, and Footmen, hey ding, a ding, ding,
Who envies the Splendour and State of a Crown.
Then follow, follow, follow, follow, Jolly Boys,
Keep in with the Beagles now whilst the Scent lies,
The fiery-fac'd God is just ready to rise;
Whose Beams all our Pleasure Cotrouls,
Whilst over the Mountains and Valleys we roll,
And Watt's fatal knell in each hollow we Toll,
And in the next Cottage top off a brown Bowl,
What Pleasure like Hunting can cherish the Soul.
By the Parliament, very well Sung, I Am serious, what say you, Madam?


Old Doting Fool.


Oh! Solon has performed to a Miracle, Sir.


Oh here is Callow, and come I hope to call 'em hence, and then I Am resolved to
attack her for all her dodging


What ail'th' the man? Let me alone, will ye -- pish, be quiet, do I meddle
with you now, -- O Lord


She Is skittish here, but she stood tame enough when we were alone within, burn
me


Madam, the m^at has thood upon the Thable above thith quarter of hour; my
Aunt Bumfiddle freth, becauth the Porrith i^h cold; the has ea^ two whole
Rowlth of Bread already, and vowth if you don't come presently, the will fall
too without ye -- Oh Lord, the man's mad I think


Oh we'll assuage my Lady's anger with another Bumper, come Captain.


Lead 'em in Boys, quick, quick -- pox of this Captain, what makes he so ready
at her?


Well, well, though he has snap'd ye before me, you have my good will, as a man
may say.


Well, Captain, you are in your Road still, you will board, I see, any thing
you take to be a Prize


There is no other dealing with you but violence, you use my heart worse than a
Pirate would an utter Enemy, and put more chains than a Christian Slave has in
the Turkish Bilboes -- what did you mean by this Letter? why do you use me thus
barbarously


I have sworn not to a^gue the case with you, but go to that Window and call my
Woman, she shall tell ye all in three words, whilst I sit down here with a
heavy heart and rest my self


Your Woman tell me?


Ay, ay, my heart's too full -- call Pimpwell there.


Mrs. Pimpwell, Mrs. Pimpwell.


Louder, louder.


Why Mrs. Pimpwell, where the Devil are ye? a Plague on her, she is got into the
Pantry, I warrant, with the Butler, or somewhere or other -- how now -- what
gone, this is another of her damned freaks by Heaven! oh, the insupportable
plagues a Man must run through that is debauched by that hellish vice called
Love; and of a Woman too, who of all the Creation least deserves it, love your
Horse, the Creature shall serve ye faithfully, and sometimes when you are drunk
(and consequently not well in your senses) shall carry ye home to your house in
safety; love your Dog, he shall guard your House from Thieves, and gratefully
return it a hundred ways; but love a Woman, she shall like the first, hourly
sting you with her Serpent subtilty, and for one minute's joy, give ye a
thousand vexations; Well, she is a Fortune, that is some amends, and if I can but
marry her, which by way of Revenge I hope I shall, I Will make her mind her
business between Decks, she shall lower her Topsail, I warrant her.


This, my dear Lovewell, is a rare contrivance, and I think the dress exact,
but art thou sure the Fool will come and bring the Writings


Most certainly, I heard the Widow give him private Orders this Morning,
thinking it more sense to trust him, being a Lover and a Stranger to you, than
any relation or Friend whatsoever; I heard her tell him too, where the
Councellours's Chamber was, and what hour she would have him go, nay I have
watched and stuck as close to 'em as their skins, in faith


Ha, ha, ha, it is excellent; but how if this damned Lawyer should be found?


Oh, I have prevented that, for I immediately contrived a Letter as from a
certain great Lady at Kensington, who being very sick, and having heard of his
Honesty and Reputation, desired him to come and make her Will, the Lawyer
surprised, immediately hurrys away, upon which I presently hired a Fellow to
stand at the stair foot, and describing the Fool with the Writings* ordered him
to be sent to this Tavern to you, ha, ha, ha, is not this well managed


A Miracle, faith, my Dear, dear witty she Machiavil, how shall I make thee
amends


You know how, Sir, and when I have given ye a Fortune, I shall then presume to
make my claim -- how now


There Is a Gentleman below in a Coach asks for Councellor Splutter.


Oh, tha^'s well, prithe^ send him up, it is he, I knew


Are you Counselor Splutter, pray Sir?


My name is Splutter, Sir, which said 40 Acres lying and being --


And I warrant can splutter like a Devil to^, if thou art well greased ha,
ha, ha, ha, very good jest faith, he has a rare plodding dull face -- I warrant
him, a good Lawyer, ha, ha, ha, well, I Have a little business with ye, Sir, if
you're at leisure


Please to si^ down, Sir? my Service to ye --


With all my heart, Sir, ha, ha, ha, gad I like him better and better, he is a
good honest toping drunken Toad too -- this is a fellow fit for business --


Now, Sir, your pleasure.


Why then, Sir, my pleasure is -- to drink first, ha, ha, ha, a very good jest,
faith


Oh, Sir, good reason --


You Will excuse me, Mr. A -- ha, ha, ha, -- I Have a light heart, but come to the
business, you knew Sir Solomon Subtle I suppose


Very well, Sir, alas poor Gentleman, he died lately at Hanib^rgh, his Lady is
my Client and intimate Friend, I expect ^very day the Writings of his Estate to
be sent me


Let me kiss thee then, my dear limb of the Law, whilst I inform thee that here
they are in this Box, ha, ha, ha, ha, -- and so here is to thee again


'Dslife, come so soon, this will be rare news to Sir Philip Freewit, for as ^
hear, he is the chief Executor, he expects to have most of the Money, but yet if
my Lady pleases --


She does please, my dear dagled Gown, ha, ha, ha, a very good jest again,
faith, if thou can but find a flaw in the Will, five hundred Pounds a^e
thine, my dear Wax squeezer


Oh, there shall be a ^law, let her never doubt, Sir, we Lawyers like Tinkers,
if we find no crack, can make one


Ha, ha, ha, ha, why that is very well said too, faith and troth -- gad I Will
kiss thee again for that, and beg thy pardon heartily for doubting thy
abilities; a plump cheek'd Rogue -- gad he puts me strangely in mind of a
little plump dutch Strumpet of my acquaintance, ha, ha, ha, well but hark thee,
my dear Law-driver, do thou know me, hah


No faith, Sir, but I suppose you're a man of Quality?


I Have 1500 a year, that is Quality enough, faith and troth, my father was but a
Slop-seller, but if he had lived, he had been a Senator for all that, so that
I Have resolved to strike up to this Widow with a whew in faith, ha, ha, ha, --
And hark thee, hark thee, dear Cook upon Littleton, shall we chouse this silly
Knight, hah


I Will rout him utterly, Sir, I Will not give him a Groat for his Executorship; if
I do not show him a Law trick that shall make him stare again, I Will give you
leave to vouch this Miracle of us, that a Lawyer refused to get Five hundred
pounds through a squeamish fit of his Conscience


Troth that would be a Miracle indeed, ha, ha, ha, here is a Bumper to thee,
prithee why do thou not laugh; gad, I could laugh methinks till I was as fat
as my Lord, my Lord, as my Lord, I say, prithee be merry; what do you Lawyers
never laugh


Never, Sir, when we intend to cheat any Body, that is our Rule.


Ha, ha, ha, -- a very good Jest, again, faith; -- I'gad, thour't an admirable
Person, and there are the Writings for thee -- and another kiss into the
bargain, Faith; -- gad there is another leer so like my Dutch Strumpe^ again,
the Rogue begins to inflame me


Well, Sir, I Will take care of 'em.


Will thou, -- gad I hope to see thee a Judge, thou have a notable rising Face,
and the credit of this business will bring thee into plaguie Practice? Com^,
prithee let us drink and laugh, ha, ha, ha, -- prithee laugh now


With all my Heart, faith I Have a merry fit comes upon me just on the sudden; --
I Will kiss you now, Sir,


Ha, ha, ha, ha, a very good Jest, faith, ah my deer little plump Dutch Whore,
ha, ha, ha


Ha, ha, ha, ha, my d^ar Fat Flanderkin, -- Fool. --


Ha, ha, ha, ha, Well, next the Widow, England, faith, I Will be hanged if thou
have thy fellow in all the Inns of Cour^, ha, ha, ha


Nor you in all Flanders, ha, ha, ha, ha.


My dear, dear, Bill and Answer, here is a Bumper to thee;


March on Pompey, I Will follow, ha, ha, ha.
So, here they are, and here the great feat is done,
Easily now the Widow may be won*
For what is a Widow when her Fortune's gone?

OH, undone, lost, ruined, beyond all possibility of a Recovery, I find now by
his s^nseless Description, that this Devil Freewit, has put a Trick upon him,
and got the Writings in spite of m^


It Is even so, the Knight it seems owned it just now in a Bravado to the
Lieutenant, with a design to have it told you again. -- Min here Flanderkin
there, has been over-reached by a mere Lawyer's Gown, the very shadow of
Knowledge has done his business


Ha, ha, now can I hardly forbear laughing, for all I have d^ne such a
Mischief; -- Why, who the Devil could imagine, that an honest Toping, Laughing
Fellow as he seemed to be, should prove a false Brother, 'gad I took him to be
as errant a Lawyer as ever took Fee on both sides, or eat a Mutton Commons in
the Temple: -- Mutton Commons, ha, ha, ha, a very good Jest, In Faith, I cannot
forbear for the Soul of me


Sot, Monster, Fool; oh, where were my Brains too, that I could imagine one of
that Nation guilty of the least Discretion: Thou stupid Dol^, with less Sense
in thee than a crawling Insect in your Muddy Fens, a Flesh-fly in the depth of
Winter, or a Mite in a Holland Cheese


'Gad I cannot forbear laughing for all that, ha, ha, ha.


Bring me a Glass of Water, my Heart's so full of Rage, it has ^urnt me up to a
Cinder


This Fellow is certainly the species of a Baboon, and I warrant has a Tail
under his Clothes; I Would give a Guinny to have him searched


A Baboon, 'dslight, thou have named the Prince of Brutes to him; this thing is
one of Nature's foul-false Births, the Eye of Providence slept when he was
born, and his dull Mother at his vile Conception, had nothing in her Mind but
drivelling Idiots, dull Asses with long Ears, unthinking Swine, with all the
other Soul-less, Lumpish Animals, the very Scum and Dross of the Creation


The Widow Railes, like a Devil to day, ha, ha, ha, ha.


But to what purpose do I wast my Lungs, and call him Fool that ^m a worse my
self, the veriest, veriest Idiot of the two, -- a Widow, 'dsdeath, and let a
Man out-wit me; ridiculous to Nature, nay, g^t my Writings too, the very Soul
and Lifeblood of a Widow; -- Oh, I could tear my Flesh, burn, stab, or poison,
do any Mischief, and to any Creature, but to a Man much more with fiercer
Vigor, and could I get the Heart of this damned Freewit, methinks I could with
greater pleasure tear it, and with more Joy could feed or my Revenge, than
Teeming Women on the longed for Fruit, their Souls des^t t'indulge their unborn
Infants


So I see she is here, and pox on it, now I'^ put up bri^kly.


This Fool comes in a rare time, he is like to be well used.


Madam, I suppose you are not ignorant what I saunter about here for; My
Father, I suppose, has told you what I would be at; and now I Am come my self in
person, and I protest left the best Game at All Fours just now when I was
within one of up, that ever I had in my life, -- because my Father told me, you
were at leisure, and this was the what do you call it, the Cricketty Minute, a
Minute when they say a Woman can deny a Man nothing; besides, I love Cricket
hugely, Madam, and if you please to throw your Heart toward me


No, but I will throw a thing more proper, I will throw this at your Head,
Buffoon; hark'e, Puppy, get thee out of my sight, and quickly, or by all that is
good, I Will beat thee.


Ha, ha, ha, ha* --


I beg your Pardon, Madam, -- what a Plague did my Father make a Fool of me
for, this is none of the Cricketty Minute


Confusion seize all Fools; oh I Am all in Flame. --


Here com^s the other Booby, this will make her Mad.


Madam, because I Am young Man, and a little awker'd in matters of Love, as a
Man may say; and my Mistress there, too, being a little Cruel, and
Hard-hearted, my Father sent me to desire your Ladyship to speak a good word
for me, because I cannot do it for my self, as a Man may say; but for all that,
as I hope to be saved, I Am up to the Ears in --


Water, ye Blockhead, ye Owl.


O Lord, Murder, Murder, I Am drowned.


Alas, poor Solon, has she cooled thy Passion?


Ha, ha, ha, he shall be called Solon the Wise no more, but Solomon the Wise,
now the Widow has new Christened him, -- ha, ha, ha, a very good Jest, Faith


There Is something for you too. --

What a mischievous thing it is, when it is angry, ha, ha, ha* --


The Devil take making of Love if this be the fruits on it, to spoil one's
Crevat and ones Clothes, this is downright Malice, as a Man man say


Sirrah, speak one syllable more of Love here, and I Will make my Footmen souse
thee over Head and Ears in the Horse-pond


This is none of Solon's Cricketty Minut^s neither, I ^i^d.


I hope my Sons, Madam, have made their Merits so well known now, and their
Interest with ye, is so great, that when my Gray Hairs shall fall to the
ground. --


As they shall presently, ye old Dotard.


The Devil's in her now, there is no hindering her.


'Dslife, get thee gone and take thy Cubs from my sight, or I will use ye all
so like Fools


Look, look, she has discovered my poor Uncle's Bald pate again, too, the
Devil's in the Widow to day, ha, ha, ha


How Is this, my Son Bias confounded, my Son Solon in disorder, and my self
unseemly treated? What do you mean by this, Madam? I never was so affronted in my
life, never since I was born, by the Parliament, now I Am serious


Mean, I care not what she means, not I, I Am sure she used me scurvily, and
I Will bear it no longer; zookers, my Blood rises at her damnably, -- I Will lay
her Toppings in the Dust, come on it what will; she may be as bald as you, for
ought I know, Father when her Toppings are off; Let me come to her, 'zooks, now
my Blood's up, I Have as devilish a Spirit as she, as a Man may say


No, prithee Brother Solon let her alone for this time; hark'e in thy Ear, when
I Have Married her, I Will revenge thee, and beat her my self


You had better all take good Advice, and be gone; you have heard, I suppose,
the reason of her Anger, Sir Philip has cho^s'd her of her Writings to day, and
in the Humor she is in, it is ten to one but she does ye some mischief or other


The Writing's gone, and seventy thousand Ducats, -- Come away, Bias, thou
shall not have her now if she would have thee


Where are these Triumvirate of Fools now? You Bully Sneak, with your Brother
Coddle-scul, and old Father stupid here, get you off my Ground, or I will use
you so like Crows, Magpies and Jackdaws, I will do more than ever Providence
did for ye, -- I will put something into your Heads, something of weight,
Puppies, not a word more, march Mine Here Van Grin, -- laugh, come laugh now; --
Where Is your Jest, now, hah! thou base, thou sordid cause of my Misfortunes,
come give me a Jest for it, laugh, I say


Sacrament, who can jest with a Pistol-Bullet, I could not laugh, Madam, if
you would give me a Thousand pounds, Faith and Troth


Out of my sight, thou Insect,
Oh, I shall grow Mad.

Nay then, such Instruments as these, are not very convenient.


Mad, Mad, raving Mad.


And I so near ye, Madam, to claim your Griefs, and reconcile your Cares.


Is there an Impudence on this side Hell like this? I Will give y'a Welcome, Sir.


Nay, not this way, Sister, I must hinder such rough Proceedings, and leave ye
to make your party good with him what other way you please, draw his Sword I Am
sure he will not; and a Man carries no other weapons about him that can hurt a
Widow, that I know of.


What in a fury, Widow, nay then thou art not fit for the good tha^ I intend
thee; I confess I had not the Confidence to visi^ thee, without the
Encouragement of Clarret, but three Bottles of excellen^ Bourdeux, -- in this
Pagan time where there is such an Inundation of Sloe, Sider and Cherry, has
made my Tongue so Elegant, and brought my Heart into so Amorous a Condition,
that methinks I could even make Love to thee, for to say truth, thou look
damnably provoking to day


'(...) in vain to abuse him, therefore 'twill be Policy in me to dissemble;
down swelling Heart, and Frowns convert to Smiles, and thou great Power that
gav'st a Woman Cunning, let him not know the R^ncor of my Heart, but sur^eit
with the flattery of my Tongue.


Sollid and thoughtful; nay, now I view your Eyes better, that downcast glance
seems to discover Care; you have had no late loss, I hope, Madam, your Husband
I count none, nor you neither, to my knowledge


How poor a Vice it is in a Man of Sense t'insult over Women's Weakness!


How damned a one, it is in a haughty Widow to think her Sense excels all Humane
kind


Well, well, you have outwitted me.


Miracle in Nature, outwitted thee, why is it possib^e? and can thou own it
too? nay then, I Will have it Chronicl'd, that she that in defiance of mankind,
armed with sharp Wit, and shielded with true Pride, that never spared a Man in
her Abuses, nor failed to ^ilt him if she knew he loved her, should in the
bloom of her flourishing Glory, yield up her Laurels to Triumphant me


Why do ye call me proud? were not my Actions natural? was it fit for me to
offer you my Fortune, that thought my Person not worth treating for? What Woman
of my Youth, nay, without Ostentation, not common Beauty too, nor least in
Wealth, could bear a slight so poor; for though my Husband gave ye up my Fortune,
there was Consignment too, of another Blessing to accompany the Money: But you
turn Marriage-hater, and your neglect calls me old, withered, ugly; blame me
not then for striving, though Successless, to dash your Pride, as you to humble
mine


Ah, Widow, Widow, though I find your subtle Devil has pared his Claws, -- I am
not now in humor to be tickled: Why did you jilt me, and receive another?
answer that


Why did you wrong me, and get another with Child before my Face? answer me
that


Wrong you, why the Devil's in these Widows, they will Ingross all a Man has,
before he has 'em, as well as after; wrong you! what because I had a mind to
use a Sample of the Grain before the heap was to be delivered in the Market;
must you call this a wrong


A Mortal one; and if you are Generous, you will right me now.


With all my Heart, and as I Am now free, and at liberty, I best can do thee
Justice; which, should I marry thee, were most impossible; I need not tell ye
why, -- you know the reason. -- Come, let us retire


Go, you are a Devil.


You are but a Widow yet; all in good time, that Title may be altered too*


Why dos't thou rail at Marriage so, thou Monster?


Because I hate it, Child, that is all the Reason.


Abhorred Impiety, to hate a Sacred Ordination, allowed by the most Knowing of
all Ages


A gross mistake, 'twas first devi^'d for Interest by Sapless Dotards, formed a
Law, that their dull Firstborn Blockheads might inherit; the generative
Faculty should b^ free, the Spirit's palled when it is confined to Duty, Restive
and stupid, and the Product's answerable; of Old the Worthles never came by
Mar^iage, the Bravest and the Wis^st were all Bastards; besides, from marrying
a Wd^^ w, Heaven defend me


A Widow, Sir, why what is a Widow?


Why, a mere Fripperer, or Broker's Shop, that is fain to sell her Wares at
second hand* yet toils to pass 'em off to Fools for new; one that is so very
knowing, that she would baulk a Youngster, and in Love's business give such violent
Instructions, 'twould break the heart of a young Fool to follow; no, if I do
forego my happy freedom, which, 'till I dote, I think never shall; the Grape
shall first be pressed by my own hand, I Will never take the squeezings of
another, I Will have a Maid, that is certain


A Maid, thou Coxcomb, I Am ashamed of thee, do thou pretend to be a man of
sense, Learned in the Mathematics of Intreague, and choose an ignorant raw
awkward Maid before a Skilful Widow, oh stupidity! Go to the Garden, take green
Gennitings, and set thy teeth an edge thou codled Coxcomb; or shall I fetch
thee some green Goosberries, and send a Maid to keep thee Company; a whitely
thing just weaned from Jointed Baby, that opens mouth to eat, but can say
nothing; such trash as this is the best fruit for Fools; a Widow, like the
blushing velve^ Peach, by Summer ripened, to indulge the taste, is a Regalia
for a Man; Maids, green crude stuff, and only fit for Boys


It Is very fine, a Lady of your Beauty and your Fortune, oh how this witty
Railery becomes, well then, Boy as I am, I Will show one manly sign, I Will manage
the Writings wisely, that I Am resolved on.


Sir Philip I Am sure can do nothing, but like a man of Honor.


Oh, cry ye mercy, Madam, and Sense too, I hope, therefore thus humbly take my
leave


Nay, but pray stay a little, Sir.


Not for the World, Madam, the Widow has so mauled me already with her great
Cannon, that should I stay to engage with your small shot, I should have more
holes in me, then a Dutch Man of War had in the last Engagement; and therefore,
to bring my Simile a little nearer home, like a Cock that is over-match'd, I
intend to shrink from the Pit before my eyes are peck'd out


Your eyes, why what do you take us for, Sir?


Two of the greatest Rarities of your kind; two that shall rally a Man to death
in an hours time, without putting your self out of breath for it.


This is one of the oddest humors! what, I warrant you have been severe with
him


No, hang him, I broke out only a little at last, when he was preferring a Maid
before me; I smothered my rage 'till then, though I confess with as much pain as
if I had had a sit of the stone, for he gave me not a word of satisfaction
about the Writings -- he designs to starve me, I Am confident, if the Law don't
relieve me


Nay, nay, no starving Sister, you have yet a hundred pound a year to live on.


What Is that? I must put down my Coach, Child, is not that starving a Widow?


Next door to it, I confess, as the humor of the Times are.


Ah! I had rather be without meat and drink a thousand times. Well, sure this
Devil will not possess him always, one happy minute must be mine at last, which to
be sure of, what would ^ not attempt* what to obtain her Ends* would not a
Woman do

Would Fortune once my working Brain inspire,
I Would plunge through deepest Sea, or fiercest Fire,
Hazard my Life, nay Soul, to compass my desire.

Nay, on my Conscience, if there is a way left, thou will conjure, but thou will have it, that I Will say for thee. W^ll, what News now?


My Lady Bumfiddle sends ye word that my Lord Brainless gives the Music at her
Lodgings this Afternoon, before they go to the Park, and desires your Company


Well, I Will go, because I know I shall meet my Tarpawlin there, whom I have
made so angry, that I believe he could beat me with as good a will, as a Saylor
that disobeyed his Orders; it is all one, I am resolved to try him thoroughly,
before I come under his hatches, there will be hours enough to beg his pardon,
if ever I give him an advantage over me

The time of Wooing is a Woman's own,
But when she is Married once, her time is gone.

Ah! dear Creature, how much am I obliged to Fortune for this lucky minute,
that gives me the blessing of meeting her alone, whom I love beyond all the
Universe, sink me


You love me, yeth I warrant ye, for what pray?


For thy self, my Dear, thy Innocence and Beauty has so charmed my heart: her
Money I mean; that I never am a^ rest, my Soul, but when I am with thee.


Oh Lord, well then, donth queeth my hand tho.


Oh! every part of thee is so Charming to me, that burn me, it is impossible for
me to subsist without thee. The Philly can stand still, I see, when she is
without Company.


Why, what do you mean to do? you will not Ravish me, will ye?


I believe she puts me in mind on it on purpose, Rot me,


What do you make all this bustle for, why don't ye then?


Oh, Lieutenant, you are a happy Man, I see.


Oh Lord, the Captain, what shall I do now?


'Dslife, what is the meaning of all this rage? she stood ^ame enough to my
thinking, when I came in


Ay, and would again, if we were alone; '^is the nature of this sort ^f Cattle
to be skittish, and Rail before Company, but they will stand as still in a Corner,
as a Town Whore (got with Child by some poor Bully) will to a Rich Country
Squire, that she intends shall father it: I must after her, for I like her Six
Thousand Pounds better than my Commission, faith, Captain.


Faith I believe thee, as do a great many more of thy Effeminate sort -- But
stay, where is my jolly Lady all this while, and the Company? sure I have not
mistook her time; oh! are you there, Madam?


Nay, you shall hear me now, and I must rail at ye, or my heart will break;
call ye ungrateful, proud, false, and unnatural, not only to abuse an honest
Fellow that loves ye, but glory and persist in it -- Heaven, what could you mean
by this Letter, this abhorred Invective?


This Letter has stuck in his throat worse than a Ship-bisket.


Well, what amends for this? What satisfaction? she seems good natured now, and
sorry for what is past, this may be the Critical minute.


I am more sorry, Sir, then you can desire, and if you would please, to name your
satisfaction


This is as I could wish, I see t'has touched her nearly.


I beg your pardon, Sir, with all my heart, and what else you you will honorably
Command


only your Love, dear Madam, that is the Prize I value beyond Empire.


It Is yours from this hour, Sir.


My Soul, Life, Heart, Blood -- Ah Pox of these Intruders, just in the nick
too, when I should have clench'd the Nail I have been so long a driving -- ah!
it is impossible to proceed, now they come like a deluge


Boy, bid 'em make ready the Tea, and set the Dishes in order: My Dear, your
humble Servant, how do you good Captain, what so close together, nay, then
there is something more in the wind; I must know, you will never thrive in it else,
Captain; hark'e, a word in your ^ar


So, now shall I be tossed by the tempest of her tongue, worse than ever I was
by a storm in the Bay of Biscay.


I vow Mrs. La Pupsey, I never look upon your fine Dog, bu^ it sets me almost a
crying; I had the finest Bolognia Shock was drowned the other day, that, of my
Soul* ever lay in Lap; I carried him to the Park every night with me, the
Creature had so swe^t a breath, that I vow I mis^ it strangely


It Is a delicate prit^y Rogue ind^ed, now my Mother is so cross, she will let me
have nothing to play with; I did but desire the other day to buy a little Monkey
for my Chamber, and flying out into a passion, she swore a great huge Oath, I
had as lieve thou should have a Man there


Go Dony, go to my Lady, and kiss her, and l^ve her, that is my sweet Creature.


Come, dear Jewel, come. --


Did you ever se^ a thing so modest, and so shy in your life, Madam, here is no
Courting him to a Wise; I have been this ^hree Months making a Match for him,
and could never get him in humor


Fy^, that is a mighty fault, indeed.


Th^n* M^da^, of all Creatures Heterog^neal, he is the most -- Cleanly, -- no
Ma^ge, ^or ever Impe^iginous in the least; -- then he is a Miracle for his
distinction in Philanthropy, he has a^ en^ire love for our Party; he knows my
Humor to a Hair; he will not come near the Tarpawlin Captain, yo^der, because
he is a Williamite, it is a wonder to tell ye, but the Creature has a strange
ave^sion for this Government


Alas, all the Ingeniou^ part of the Nation have so, Madam.


W^ll, l'vads I will have a Dog then, let my Mother say what she will; -- I
believe it teaches her to talk so, for I never hea^d such fine words in my
life.


Faith, Madam, all that I can find by your long whispering, is, that you have a
mind to dine with me to morrow


Why, what a blunt Ass art thou* -- to tell me of Dining with thee; Dine with
thy Mistres^, Fool, and let m^ b^ by to put in a word for thee, if thou'^t
wise; -- depend upon me, I know he^ Humor to a Scruple, and if thou take my
Council, thou shall have her: -- Do I talk of Dinners now? -- it is true, a good
fat Haunch of Venison, boiled with Colli^lowers, would do well to piddle over:
-- Eating together begets Love: 'Twas my Husband'^ Venison more than himself,
that first won my Heart, as I Am a Protestant


W^ll then, Madam, since you will be concerned in my Affair, be sure you are
Industrious


Keep up thy Inter^st with me, thou shall have her, Boy.


Oh, Madam, your Ladyships most humble Servant, yours, yours, dear Ladies, and
your most obedient Slave, dear, sweet, pretty Dony; gad I beg your Pardons,
all, for being thus tardy; oh, how does my dear Captain too? why this is a
piece of a Miracl^ to find thee ashore, and especially amongst the Ladies,
where Music is going forward, for I know thou hate all these Effeminate
Instruments, hark'e, shall I send to the Tower, and borrow two or three pieces
of Canon to entertain the^, ha, ha, ha


Coxcomb. --


Would they would haste and begin; that grim furly look of the Captains, will
put us all out of Humor, else; what a Face is there, with a grim^ce as sower
as if the Surgeon were just putting him on a Wooden-Leg


The Devil it is, -- well, I hope you like it; however, Madam. --


I like it, I like the Face upon that Fiddle there, better by half; I like it,
-- ha, ha, ha, ha


Bu^, Madam, Madam.


Oh, none of your Culverin Shot here, good Captain, you had better use it
against the French at Sea


Damn her, she is got into one of her old freaks again.


Words of course, words of course, Fool, apply thy self to me; I tell thee,
I Will do thy business; hark in thy ear, get the Venison ready


Why, sure the Gentleman cannot be so desipient, to take any thing ill that a
Lady says; Railery from a Woman, though never so sev^re, should be supported by
every man of Sense with generous Equanimity


Oh, good Madam, be pleased to Cramp your Dog there, with your hard Phrases,
and let him lick you an answer, how you please; or go and puzzle my Lord there,
any one but me I bes^^eh ye


Lick me an Answer, come Sir, I must tell ye, your Discourse ha^ no
Concatination in it, it is all blunt and disjoyn^ed, and, as my Lord says, your
Soul is very unmusical, that I believe you never knew a Diaphony from a
Diapason


Nay, nay, I Will not b^ tongue-worried now, I Have a remedy ^ort. --


Well, I swear I could live and dye with this La Pupsey, if it were only to
hear her talk


She excels me, I think in the Cassicks, but I was always accounted much the
best Natural Philosopher


Come, Madam, now I will present you with my own Composition, which I lately
told ye of, wherein I envy the joys of that happy Creature, your Dog, and
passionately bemoan my own Infidelity; I was extremely Melancholy when I writ
it


Where Is your bow down to the ground, Dony? Your Lordships most humble Servant,
says he.


My Lady Hockly, wilt have any Tea? Mrs Berenice, prithee come and sit by me.


It Is for my Instruction, I know, Madam, -- now has she some smutty Joke or
other to whisper me:

Ay* -- it is as I said.


Come, my Lord, now your own, I beseech ye, I know it must be extraordinary.


With all my Heart; you must know Ladies, I call it Celadon's Complaint against
Monsieur Le Chien; it is writ like a Man of Quality, when the next new Play
comes out: I intend to give it the Poet, to show 'em the right way of making a
Song: Hem, hem, --


GReat Jove once made Love like ^ Bull;
With Li^da a Swan was in vogue,
And to persevere in that Rule,
He now does descend like a Dog;
For when I to Silvia would speak,
Or on her Breast sigh what I mean;
My Heart strings are ready to break,
For there I find Monsi^ur Le Chien.
2. For Knowledge in Modish Intreagues,
Or managing well an Amor,
I defy any one with two Legs,
But here I am Rivaled by sour:
Distracted all night with my wrongs,
I cry, Cruel Gods, -- what do you mean,
That what to my Merit belongs
You bestow upon Monsieur Le Chien.
3 For Feature or Niceness in Dress,
Compare with him surely I can;
Nor vainly my self should express,
To say I am much more a Man;
To the Government firm too, as he,
(The former I cunningly mean)
And if he Religious can be,
I Am as much sure as Monsieur Le Chien.
4 But what need I publish my part^,
Or idly my Passion relate;
Since Fancy that Captivates Hearts
Resolves not to alter my Fate:
I may Sing, Caper, Ogle, and Speak,
And make a long Court ausi bien,
And yet with one passionate ^ick
I Am out-rival'd by Monsieur Le Chien.
Very pretty truly, my Lord.


Pretty, it is incomparable, I swear, your bow to my Lord down to the ground
again, Dony.


N^, Faith, there is no great matter in 'em, though the Conceit, truly I think is
new; but now, Madam, in pursuance of French G^llantry, I hope to have the
honor to see the particular entertainment you promised.


Strike up Music.


Ah* sweet Mrs. La Pupsey, what would I give to do as much; here, prithee take
some Tea, it is good now you are hot


Tea, Madam, it is burnt Brandy.


Why, that is all the Tea in Fashion, now, Fool.


^om^, let us go to Bright^bridge Garden to Cool; Ladies, I Will retire and
dress, and wait on ye there instantly; there will be all the World this fine
Evening


It Is very true, as I Am a Protestant: come then, my dears, let us go?


Come, Dony, abroad, abroad, Dony kiss me, ye dear Jewel, -- kiss, kiss.


Did you not promise me, etc.


(...) ye revoke your Promise then, can ye be so ungrateful?


Prithee, my dear, no more, that I will always love thee, thou may assure thy
self


love me, and keep me like a Slave dishonored thus, it is most impossible, no,
if you would h^^e me bel^eve you have the least Comp^ssion for me: perform your
Promise, and take me for your Wi^e


My Wife, then I should never love thee more.


Have I not purchased ye with Toil and Study, paid with my Labor and
Industrious Wit, a Ransom for repeal of my Dishonor, nay, brought ye a Fortune
too beyond your hopes, the best Inducement to a Marr^age st^te, and de'ye
^orget me? fie, Sir, indeed* you must not, you know you are mine by bargain


And will perform it to th^e the best way, by a fr^e, vigorous and active love,
nay, if I fail thee, Child, then I were ungrateful indeed


You never can perform, unless you marry me.


Oh, I warrant ^hee, Child, I warrant thee.


You know I love ye much beyond my life; you know what is due to a Vow of
Honour^ and though my tender years, and too fond Heart, charmed by your Merit,
and your graceful Person, was won too soon at first: I could not doubt your
Vows, and was as innocent of doing wrong, as fearless of receiving it from you


'D^heart, with naming Marriage, g^d thou have also made me keck already: oh, I
should make a damned confounded Husband; I am like those that cannot sleep with
Doors and Windows shut, if I want Air I suffocate: besides, is it not better to
come to thee, wanton and bri^k, and aerie as a Bird, to hop into the Bosom,
Sing and Bill, then fly away, soon after come again, pruning my self in welcome
Liberty, than be confined to moulter in a Cage, and batten in the Excrement of
Marriage


Does this Consideration Countervail my being a Whore, and my dear Boy a
Bastard. --


A Bastard, why he is the more like to be a Hero, I hope; I was a Bastard my
self


No, you design, I see, to break my Heart: ah barbarou^ Man, how can you be so
Cruel? have I not always been most faithful to ye? can there be any Virtue in a
Wife, which I Would not hourly practice to oblige ye? nay, do me but this Justice,
you shall find, I Will be the dearest h^mblest of your Creatures: Say, think, do
what you please, I Will be obedient, never repine or grumble at your Actions, nor
say you wrong me, though you give cause; never expect the Pleasures that Wives
covet, to gad abroad, and Riot in rich Clothes, but sit at home all day like a
House-Dove, and if I have you there be glad and merry, if not, with throbbing
Heart be still and Patient -- my Eyes shall watch, which if some drops should
fill I Will dry 'em up just as I hear you coming, and meet my Love still with a
face of Joy


Pretty Rogue, prithee no more of this sad stuff, -- thou made me sick just
now with talking, and now thou make me melancholy


Upon my Knees I beg.


Oh fie, this carrying the humor on so far, will make me Angry, you know my
Humor, and it is unalterable, -- I Will provide for ye well, and you in reason
should desire no more; and now our busines^ is done, -- you shall come away
from Sir Lawrence to morrow, -- but not a word more of this stuff, as you
tender my Displeasure. -- Marry, in the Devils name, 'd^death I Am all over in a
cold Sweat at the thought on it.


Base and perfidious, have thou then deciv'd me, is there no truth nor honor
in the Sex, no Balmy Cure for betrayed Innocence too fondly trusting in
deceitful Man? -- Ah, no, I find there is not, let Cunning then, the Woman's
never sailing Art assist me; once more I Will set my fruitful Brains to work, --
fawn, wheedle, lie, and seem to be pleased, as is if he really had kept his
Promise: hah, it is hatching here al^eady, and I hope 'twill prosper, to redress
such a wrong every just Power will Aid me

The very Indian Heathens hate this Ill,
They never promise more than they fulfill:
If any Virgin does her Humor trust
Her Tawny Lover, though he is rude is just:
But our worse Heathens here conspire our Ruin,
And make a jest of a poor Maid's undoing.

FOR an old Courtier that has lived in four Kings Reigns, seen three Crowned,
and had a strong hand in the late Revolution, who, though he has got nothing, has
spent an Estate amongst 'em, and that is goo^ sign one of a Courtier, to find in
his latter days such a dearth of good Manners, as to see himself affronted, and
his Progeny baffled, by a clest Canibal, a Woman; it has not only given me the
Spleen, but methinks I have upon me, the Gout, the Stone, the Sciatica, and all
the Distempers incident to Human frailty, through mere vexation by the
Parlia^ent


Well, let it be as it will, I Will be a Man or a Mouse I Am resolved on it, I will
have a Wife somewhere or other, now my mind is set on it, let the Widow be as
Musty as she pleases -- what, any Man that will Marry need not want a Wife in
London sure


No Boy, I Have another in my Eye for thee, I look upon this senceless haughty
Minx that abused us, as upon a thing of nothing, and now she is baffled of her
Writings, a thing that has nothing, nor shall deserve our further trouble* for
a Widow without Money, is like a Purse without it, when once she is empty she
in not worth wearing


True, Father, or like a Nut that is Maggot-eaten, when this Kernel's gone once,
the Shell is not worth cracking, as a Man may say


By the Parliament, and that is well said, Solon, I see this Boy has his Wit by
sits and girds, as Women have their good Humors -- gad, one of the old
Patriarch^ could not have spoke a wiser thing than that now


There Is another Widow that I know of, that I believe has a Months mind to me,
and I Will go and strike her up ere long; 'y^aith I Will make but few words with
her, not I; if they wont when they may, they may let it alone for Bias, -- it is
the Widow Hockley I mean, I believe you know her, old Gentleman


How now, -- What would this Woman have, it is all one, I Will have a smack at
her, says, I Will give her a touch to remember me by*


Rude ill-bred Fellow.


Ha, ha -- Did you ever see such a Mettled Rogue, this is so like me in my
young days, I have done as much to my Mo^hers Dairy-Maid many a time in the
Corn-^ield at home


Nay, never frown nor call names for the matter, here are Lads of mettl^, I can
tell ye but that


Prithee Fool be quiet, I have nothing to say to thee, my business is to this
Gentleman.


Me ^orsooth, why I don't know ye not I, as a Man may say.


Give her a smack, Solon, don't let her prate, give her a smack, I did Boy.


Sir, though I Am a stranger to ye, I suppose you know my Mistress, Madam (...).


Humph, Berenice.


Who knowing ye to be in the Garden, sends word by me, that she desires to be
happy in your good company


Smack her, I say, Solon. Come, I Will show thee the way.


'Dsheart, let her alone, Sirrah. Madam, your most humble Servant -- my Son
shall wait upon her Ladyship instantly, and I beg your pardon heartily for t
others rudeness, for to say the truth, he is drunk, Madam, -- I had no way but
that to bring the Dog off.


I Am satisfied, Sir, -- come, Sir, Will ye go?


Ay with all my heart. Really Madam, I Am overjoyed, as a Man may say.


Gadzooks, why this Solon's a lucky Dog now.


Lucky, ay: -- you had like to have made fine work, sie upon it: in troth Bias,
you must not be so rampant, you might have spoiled your Brother's Fortune by it,
by the Parliament you might, now I Am serious, -- but go, do you hear, Comb your
Peruke, and spruce your self up, the new Widow will be here presen^ly, she is to
come with my Sister Bumfiddle -- go go you will find me hereabouts.

Ah, many a nights rest do these two Boys hinder me of, they are two ingenious
Youths truly, at least, if I may be Judge, especially Solon, wherein I di^^et
from other Fathers, who generally are ^ondest of the eldest Blockhead; now I am
of the youngest: I have a Daughter too, but I think she is secure enough from
the Town-Fellows, for I have neither let her Write nor Read, because she shall not
understand Love Letters: humph, by the Parliament, here she comes, and that
same Rake*helly Lieutenant with her,


To affront and abuse your humble Servant so, my dear pretty Creature, without
any reason, I swear it went to my Heart


Why, What would you have me do when the Folks thee us, I Am tho ashamed before
company, I cannot tell what to do, besides, if my Father should but know


Which, the Devils in him if he should, being so far out of the way --


He would never let me go abroad again, for he hates I thould talk to a Man for
fear I thould Marry, and oblige him to pay me a Porthion


Does he so, Oatmeal Face, I shall talk with you presently.


Thy Father, ah prithee don't name him, Child, as long as I have thee of my
side, the old Fellow's but aCipher, besides, I out-wit him always, I lead him
by the Nose whenever I see him, Rot me


Very good, there is an impudent Rogue too, he has an ignorant raw skittish
Head, with a Flairing Comode on, and he is an Addle Blockheaded B^lly, with a
^luttering Scarf on, they are a mighty ^ine Couple indeed


Nay, pish -- now you squeeth me too hard again, lord you make such a Bu^^le
always, and do tho Ru^^le and tumble ones Head with kithing one


A thousand Pardons my dear Rogue* that is well put in my Head faith.


Oh rare, rare doings! She cannot speak at home, nor will not let a Man touch her
when she is before me; but the Queen can bill like a Pidgeon, I see, now.


O my Conscience, for ought I thee you intend to marry me.


Marry thee; Ay, what else my dear Rogue.


O Lord, I shall never endure it, I shall cry my self to death.


O hang ye --


What a plague does she mean? I believe she has a mind to have a touch
beforehand, Sink me


Besides, my Father will kill me.


He, an Old Grizzle, -- 'Dslife I Would banter him to death in half an hours time;
and if he should but touch thee, I would give him a sillup with my two Fingers,
that should knock him as ^lat as a Battle-Ax* Burn me


Why then Sirrah, there is a ^illup to provoke ye -- Come Draw, Bully, Draw -- I
will cut your Throat else, by the Parliament I will, I can Swear as well as
you, Dogbolt


'Dsheart, Sir Lawrence here; what shall I do now?


My Father! Now the Devil take all ill Luck -- I mutht take his part -- Do, do,
Father -- Beat him, thwinge him, break his Bones, cut his Throat, for I can
never be quiet for him, like a deboath'd, drunken, doltish, dunderheaded,
detheitful, damned, devilish Dog, as he is, to t^ith me ^ho


So, so; She Is in the old style again -- I shall be worried between 'em if my
Legs don't befriend me --


A Cowardly Rascal; what is he gone? -- Here Is a fine Scarse-Officer for ye, --
if they should chance to be all such, we should beat the French finely; we
should have a special Army by the Parliament


I believe, Sir, I have forwarned the Fellow above a Thouthand times tho I have.


Oh, very likely; that made you cry, O Lord you make thutch a Buthle, and do
tho Ru^^le ones head with kithing one, -- Hah, you lithping Queen you: -- But
I Will manage you I Will warrant you. -- Come Hussy, ^ome along with me.


You never saw such a Fellow as I am in your life, Captain, for the more the
Widow Railed, the more I Laughed, ha, ha, ha, till she fetched out the
Pistolls, and then she made me as mute as a Fish says; for you know there was
no Jest in that; but till then, ha, ha, ha, ha, you would have died with
Laughing, Jest after Jest, Hit after Hit, Joke after Joke, souse upon her, as
fast as Hops, you never saw such a fellow in your life, Faith and Troth


No the Devil take me not I, nor any one else, I b^lieve.


I Will discover my self to the Fool, 'twill add to the Jest.


No, prithee, not yet; let him go on a little further.


But the Devilish Jest of all was, that I should give the Writings, instead of
the confounded Cou^s^llor, to this plaguey Sir Philip, ha, ha, ha, ha, -- whom I
never saw in my Life; but I hear he is the Devil of a Fellow


The Devil he is, and are you sure you don't know him when you see him, Min
Here Van Blunderpa^e


Ha, ha, ha, ha --


Ha, ha, ha, ha --


It Is so, it is he; Give me thy hand ye Devil you, hark ye you served me a
plaguey trick, ye young Dog, but I cannot be angry with thee for the heart of me,
ha, ha, ha, ha -- Well I Am in haste now, but I must Crack a Bottle with thee
some time or other, for I cannot be angry faith, ha, ha, ha


No, so I ^ind; ha, ha, ha. --


For fear of being beaten, ha, ha, ha, -- it is such a grinning Puppy; and here
comes another almost as bad; Oh my Lord, what you are hunting the Duck here, I
suppose; Mrs. La Pupsey is in the next. Walk, she is dived just before ye


A Pox take my Valet du Chamber, I should have been here half an hour ago, if
the Rascal had Dressed me sooner: -- Prithee, Sir Philip how do like me,
you are a Man of Judgment; the Devil take me if I am not very much out of
humor about it


Why, what would you have my Lord? here is the Brandenburgh's Cut to a Hair, I
see. The Walks begin to sill, here is Leviathan coming, and the rest of the fry,
I shall be swallowed if I stay, farewell: I Will go and sit an hour with my
little dear at home, and keep my word with her like a Man of Honor.


I had a Command from my Lady of the Lake too, to attend, she is somewhere in
the Garden and I must follow her, though the dear damned Devil abuses me
perpetually: 'Slise here she is -- hah --

^irrah, let go her hand, or I Will cut your Ears off before her Face.


I will not, no, though you could Roar as loud as a Cannon, a^ a man may say.


Why then I Will try if this can make ye, Rascal.


Do, Draw if thou dare, thou Rash, thou Choleric Fool; draw but an Inch;
nay, do but look as if thou would, by all the Saints above, I Will discard thee
for ever


Death, Hell, and Furies! you make me a mere Changeling.


Why, then I make you what you are; and suppose you are Commanded to Act an Ass
a little, will you refuse it to oblige your Mistress


To Rank me with such a thing as that, a Dolt, a Fool.


Fool in your Face, Sir. Gadzookers, Madam, stand by and see fair play; you
shall see me give the Captain a Salt-Eel: 'Slid I Will not be baffled by never a
Water Rat of 'em all, for now my blood's up I Will cut and slash, or go to
Loggerheads with him if he dares


Ha, ha, ha, This Fool will make rare sport; I Will improve it.


Do You hear, on my Conscience he will beat thee.


Oh Women, Women! what were Men born to suffer.


To call a Gentleman Fool, a Man of his rare Qualifications; you shall see a
spice of his parts, come Dance, Sir, -- Extempore. -- There Is a Lover for ye:
So, now break a ^est, quick, quick, break a Jest


A Jest; why I say the Captain will never take a French Prize at Sea; because
he is so ill at taking an English one ashore* there is a Jest for ye


Sordid Puppy.


There Is a Jest Extempore; that is more than the greatest Wit in Town can do, by
this Light, Captain


Oons, do you call that a Jest.


A Jest, Ay; and a good one too: Come now, Sir, as your last Trial, Sing the
Dialogue with me, that I showed you in the Arbor just now -- Observe Captain.
-- DAmon, if I should receive your Addresses
What would you do to deserve my Embraces?

If my dear Silvia would favor my Passion;
I would in faithful Love, Excel the Nation.

I am Rich, Fair, and Young, Charming my Face is;
What merit can you boast to gain such Graces?

I can Sing, Dance, Run, Leap, Wrestle, and Tumble;
And all the Day and Night be your most humble.

Can you be patient, and Jealousy smother,
If you should Chance to see me Kiss another.

I Am in good Nature all others exceeding;
And well acquainted too with your Town breeding.

Or if before my Time you find me swelling;
Would you not grumble, nor think of Rebelling?

I front my betters have learnt those Expedients;
And can by City Rule practice Obedience.

Or if in Riot, Rich Cloths, or at Play still,
I lavish Thousands, yet would you Obey still?

In living great you would add to my Fame too:
There Is scarce a London Wife but does the same too.

Take, Take my hand then, and straight let us effect it;
Thou art the very Fool I Have long Expected.

Let Fortune frown I can never miscarry,
For just such Fools as I are all that Marry.





Very good; What think you now, Sir? Is this accomplished person a Fool? When
will you do as much Captain


Well I Am fated to be the Fool my self; what would you have me say.


Then live and learn, I mean more manners, Sir, than to question my behavior;
do that when you have power over me: Come, Sir


'Dsdeath, you will not walk alone with him.


Not alone with him; who told you so? Come worthy Sir.


Gadzooks this is the Cricketty Minute, as my Brother Bias calls it: Lord how
the Captain looks! as a Man may say.


Go and be damned; I Will plague my self no more; but only this, I Will beat that
Fellow, present her with his Nose, and never see her after


Then dear Sir, or dear Madam, for I yet scarce know what to call ye, I am so
transported with what you have told me, Will you promise to be true to me


As your own Heart, Madam, you see before ye, a poor un^ortunate Woman, abused
beyond ^ufferance, by that worst of Monsters Sir Philip, the just Sense of
which has raised my Spleen so high, that I will crack my Brain but be revenged,
therefore once more assure your self, that as for his sake my Wit has used you
ill, so for yours and my own, it shall make ample satisfaction


Get but the Writings back -- I Will wear ^hee here, here next my Heart, where
thou shall grow for ever


I Will do it or dye -- Have you seen Counselor Splutter since we conferred last
night together, he should have been here this Minute


No, but have Fee'd him largely, not for his own, but to take thy Advice.


And he has done it faithfully, he has contrived the rarest new Deed about the
Estate of Sir Solomon's Uncle, that died at Hamburgh, that our witty Knight
will be so puzzled about it, for I know his covetous Humor, and have accordingly
fitted him; oh, here he comes, so Sir, you have dispatched I see


Ah Sir, you could not doubt that, when I was to serve so good a Client as my
Lady, here is that will puzzle the Spark, or the Devil's in'^, but if this trick
should fail, we have still another Game to play with him, for then I Will advise
my Lady to go on with her Writ of Cozenage, 'gad there we'll trounce him


No, prithee since Wit has begun, let Wit end it, and do thou but play thy part
in bantring, as well as I have ^one in flattering and fawning on him, it is
impossible but we should succeed


Does he swallow that Pill finely?


As I could wish, and now I don't touch upon Marriage, the lewd wretch is as
kind to me, as he should really have been, had he done me Justice, whilst I
degenerated by my wrongs, lie in his Arms and Plot like a true Jilt, and whilst
he kisses me, vow dire revenge, -- Hark, the Garden Bell rings, it is he, all
away to your Post, and Lawyer -- mind but your Cue, never doubt the happy Issue,
when I have finished the work this shall be the sign.


And if there be a happy Star for Widows, shine clear now I beseech thee.


How does my Blessing, what alone and melancholy, well, a pox take all Business
I say, I had been with thee an hour sooner, but that the House of Commons sat
so late, tha


That you could not mind your Mistress, for minding the weighty Affairs of
S^ate, hah -- If I had not helped him out, that Lie would have made him black
in the Face


Right Child, well but prithee, How go Affairs with the Widow, hah, and the old
Musty Knight, have thou taken thy leave


Speak softly, Sir, I have a Secret to tell ye.


A Secret, prithee what is it, out with it;


Come a little further from that Door there.


That Door, Why what is the matter?


Hush, softly I tell ye, hark in your Ear, Counselor Splutter's in the next
Room


Counselor Splutter, how so, nay your Footman can tell ye that he showed him
up, for my part I absconded, it was not sit for me to be seen


But prithee can tell nothing of the business?


Why, by what I overheard, the Widow and he have had a difference about the
Deed of the other Estate of Sir Solomon's Uncle at Hamburgh, which is in his
possession, in which it seems you have likewise a considerable share, and the
stingy Widow not giving a good Fee, I suppose he is come over to your side, --
so that you are like to wallow in good Fortune now --


Dear dear lucky Rogue -- it is thou art the cause of all, and I will so reward
thee -- well, I Will go to him --


Patience a little, Sir, there may be a trick in it, and he may chance to be a
false Brother, and design to overreach ye, now I have it in my Head, Sir


What, what, dear Rogue?


As for your good, Sir, I am still contriving.


Sweet, charming, precious, prithee go on.


That if this Lawyer should prove a knave, which you know is no miracle.


No no, a Miracle, no no.


And you two should differ about Proposals, being possessed of the Deed, having
power to wrong ye; to prevent all, I have contrived that you should lock me
into the Closset here, then bring him in to discourse the business over, so
that I hearing every word between ye, may be a good Evidence in case of Knavery


I gad, you are in the right Child, why, thy Wit increases every Minute, it
keeps no bounds, why this is the prettiest project to out-trick a Lawyer, here,
get in quickly my dear, pretty Angel, faith thou take too much care


All for you sake, Sir.


I know it, and will be grateful to thee my Delight, my Jewel -- there is no
Service under Heaven that I would not do to oblige my Dear, Dear, Witty, Sweet,
Kind, Lucky


Will you Marry me, Sir?


Aw, -- go go, prithee get into the Closset Child, I Am afraid the Man of Law
will bolt in upon us, and then our Plot's spoiled


Do You keck still; I Will make ye glad to do it ere I have done with ye.


So now, I Am recovered from my Fit again;


I have 'em once more, and to Sacred Fate, thus low I bow, with thanks for the
Success: The Jewels too Man's glittering

Now Marriage-Hater, though I still must be,
Unhappy in my wronged Virginity;
I Will keep thee poor, thus I Am revenged of thee,
I Will never pay thee for my Infamy.

Come Sir, here is a better light, pray speak out; I Would not give three half pence
a Motion from this Lawyer, he would not be heard two foot off in Westminster hall.


She Is gone, I heard the Sign, --

Why truly, Sir, my Lungs are none o'th best -- Ugh, Ugh --


Come, prithee begin; you are a plaguey while about it; -- Come, this Indenture.


This Indenture made the Fifteen Day of August, Anno. Dom. 1690.


So, now he Mouths it like a right Lawyer; the Devil's in it if she does not
hear him now --


In the Third Year of the Reign -- but hark ye; before I go any further let us
see the Will, to know whether your Name is Right here, I Will not read a Word
more till I see that, you may be the wrong Person for ought I know


Pox of his dilatory Impertinence; now must I go fetch the Writings out of my
Closet. -- How now, the Door open, -- sure this Lawyer could not blow a Door
open with his Bawling; -- No, no, it maybe I slipped the Lock; I hope all is well
within.


I, much good may't do ye with the Nest, the Birds are flown to my knowledge,
and I Will after 'em; there is a Lawyers trick for ye.


Have got 'em?


Fast, fast, Madam; I Have secured 'em for ye, where they shall never reach his
Clutches more


Oh thou dear life of all my Joys to come; what shall I do to show my
Gratitude. --


Robbed, Cheated, Tricked, Undone, by Heaven, not only the Writings gone, but
Jewels ^oo, -- A plague of this Lawyer, and the Female Devil that set him at
Work, where are they now -- hah --


My Dear, Witty, Obliging --


The Widow here, nay then it is past Redemption; my Damnation is preparing and
here are my Tormentors ready: Ah Fool, Fool, dull thoughtless Idiot


Now for my Game with him; I Will try what Wit he has, now Fortu^^ turns the
Scale -- Most Noble Sir, Charmed with your Person, routed by your Wit; My Heart
new Modeled, and my Pride laid low, I Am contrary to Custom come to Woo ye;
and though a Widow, a mere Brokers-shop, that as you say put off Stale Wares for
New, must beg ye to take up with an Old Suit, and Marry me whilst I am worth
the wearing


Oh! --


Or if you think a broken Virgin Better, that is as good a Maid as you have
left her, and can make shift to Dine on a poor Joint, that* you have mad^ your
Breakfast on before, Here I stand by you ready Cooked and Dressed, to be Cut
up, Sir, by the Knife of Matrimony


So, there is two Broad Arrows gone through my short Ribs already -- such
another Attack and I Am gone


Though you are possessed of Seventy thousand Ducats, a mighty Sum in Jewels too,
yet, Sir, in Charity you know --


Though loaded with your new Estate, in Hamburgh too, Sir, you should not slight
poor me


Ah Plague upon ye.


A young brisk Widow, is no Purgatory, Sir.


No, Sir, nor is the Property much altered in Virgins of my sort.


Ah, the Devil take your sorts -- there is no remedy, I shall be worried.


Fie, fie, Sir, it is a shame to let us Court ye so, come, faith, say the word,
shall we draw Cuts


A short and a Long, Come, Sir, here is a slip of Parchment that tied the Box of
Writings, this will do rarely.


Ah stinging Devil.


Ha, ha, ha, -- he will fall to my Lot, on my Conscience.


Nay, that is Injustice, he should rather fall to mine to make amends for old
scores, -- What say ye, Sir


Why, I say, that if ye don't both get ye instantly out of the Roo^, I shall
beat ye


Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Ha, ha, ha, ha.


A Plague on your Merriment, would the Devil had these Lodgings for being so
near the Street, I Would try else if you would make another sort of noise


That Lewdness has undone thee, impious Wretch, the scrowl of thy Offenses are
full numbered, and punishment pursues thy Guilt apace, can thou look on me and
not blush to death to see the Innocence, thy Vice has ruined; for though by
Perjuries and Oaths betrayed, I swear I was so innocent of Ill, I thought all
Love like mine, was Honorable


Will thou make me forget my sel^, Will thou not be gone, thou Witch thou
Devil? -- Consound 'em, What shall I do with 'em


Now Sir, pursue your Marriage-hating Humor, Men of great Fortunes may do what
they please, -- Fool, thou shall be my Days and Nights diversion, I Will never
eat but the Theme of all the Jests, shall be Sir Philip's Wit, Sir Philip's
Humor, and when I go to Bed, my very Woman -- viewing the Jewels, shall even
burst with Laughing, and cry out, Oh silly, silly, silly Marriage-hater


And when I come to the sport --


Why then a Legion comes, a thousand thousand, 'dsdeath, I shall draw upon 'em,
if I stay, I Have no patience lest.


Nay, I have not done with ye yet, Sir.


There Is a Widow's Call to Marriage too, Sir, I know you love it dearly.

Oh wretched Tribe, that dare that Law dispute;
Which does their Race distinguish from the Brute:
Lust was a Chaos, till the Great Creator,
Confined to bounds, the Wilds of Human Nature;
But this foul Beast as if of Bounds ashamed.
Defying Marriage, chooses to be Damned.

SUre there never was so ^ond a fool as I, now the heat of my passion is over,
I cannot for the heart of me forbear coming back to make him another Proposal,
he has used me barbarously, but then he has used me kindly too by sits, but
then again, the wrong he did me in getting me with Child, is insufferable, --
ay, but then again, 'twas with my own consent, but then 'twas monstrous in him
to refuse to make me amends, ay, but how do I know but this last kindness may
Convert him, -- it is no imprudence to try him once more, Heaven may have
changed his Mind. Sir, Sir, -- a word we. --

How now, How dare thou come back to abuse me, thou Sorceress, thou Thief,
thou damned confounded plaguey Creature


Alas dear Sir, why do ye wrong me so?


Dear Sir, -- ah pox upon thee, dare thou mock me?


Not I upon my Soul, Sir.


Or do thou come back for my Clothes and Money, thou have not robbed me
enough, have thou, thou Sybil. -- Where are the Writings and the Jewels, Gipsey
hah


Pray be not angry, Sir, I have 'em safe.


Hah, Have thou 'em, -- have a care of Lying.


By all that is good I have, Sir, the Widow has not touched 'em yet.


How Is this, -- What a plague, this little Witch did not take 'em. by the way
of frolic only, sure, 'dsdeath unriddle this quickly, I Am impatient


You shall have 'em again, Sir.


Hah, What say thou?


You shall have 'em again. --


Shall I, -- Where, When, How? 'dsdeath don't tri^le with me.


From* me, Sir, from this Hand, this liberal Hand that gave away my Heart,
shall give what you desire


Then I Will believe thou love me.


But you must Marry, Sir.


Ugh, ugh, ^gh. --


And that before hand too, else I am off the Bargain.


Art thou resolv'dd to Murder me?


Murder ye, sie, 'twill be a Health perpetual, all your life past has been
perpetual hurry, lavish and wild, it is time, Sir, now to settle


Settle, and Marry, So; there is, I remember, a third convenience be^ongs to it
too


You Will find your best Convenience is to do it Sir, take me, and take all; yet,
-- if not, Adieu to ye, I shall make shift to save a Fortune out on it


Let me consider, and ere I give my resolution fully, sum up the Catalogue of
Marriage Evils


Do, Sir, whilst I opposing answer with its Blessings.


Imprimis, to Marry ones Stale Mistress, ridiculous! --


Not when your Fortune's sunk, and she brings ye Thirty thousand pounds to
build it up again


Secondly, to feed still upon the same Dish, Morn after Morn, Night after
Night. -- Egud, --


Wholesome, wholesome, it is the variety of Kickshaws that b^eed so many
Diseases


Thirdly, to be Forty times called Whoremaster, is not half so Igneminous as
one Cuckold, -- oh --


Nor is the plague of Cuckoldom half so Nauseous as that one Disease that
attends the unfortunate Whoremaster


Fourthly, to live like a Dog with a Bottle tied fast to his Ta^l, or an Ape
with a great Clog on; Oh Intolerable


Which you would never have done, if like an Ape you were not Mischievous, or
did not like an unlucky Curr run after other Men's Sheep


Then to have a useless Wife Puking -- Ugh -- an Impertinent Nurse a Snoring
pugh -- And a little squab Brat a Bawling, -- Ugh, ugh, ugh, -- Oh the Devil, I
shall fetch my Lungs up, I shall never endure it.


Why then, Adieu, I Will never ask ye more, I am resolved on it.


Stay -- A lucky thought comes to me on the sudden, which if it take Effect,
secures me yet --


At the Streets end, with promise to come and deliver all up to her this
Evening; and since you persevere thus in Injustice, I am resolved I Will do it, --
She Is so overjoyed that she Intends to have the Music and a Masquerade at her
Lodging to Night; she will be grateful to me though you wont


Come hither, thou have won me, I will do it.


What? Marry me.


Pox, prithee name it by some other word, a Thunderbolt is not so dreadful the
plaguey Black Coat, shall do the plaguey business, if that is sufficient


It Is all I wish; oh, how my Heart beats for Joy, this is the happiest Moment I
ever saw, --


I Will get a Parson and in an hour be with ye; till when, adieu: Ah little did I
ever think to be Fooled thus


Nor I to be so happy. --


Of what an odd kind of Composition is the Nature of Man: -- If Consideration
now could take place in me, I have no reason to deny doing Justice, to this
pretty Creature, that is so kind, and can do me so much good, but on my
Conscience, my only cause of hating a Wife, is, because it is convenient for
me; and Marriage in those of my humor, is just like Devotion, Loved and
Practiced the less, because it is Enjoined us; besides, being outwitted by
this little Devil has so nettled me, that I cannot forbear putting one Trick
more upon her, though it is unreasonable: Let me see, she will be Married before
she refunds, -- Very good; why she shall, -- and I think I have a Valet de
Chamber can perform the Office as well as any Priest in Christendom; it is true,
he is an Irishman, but a little sense will serve to do such a business. -- Hey
-- Mack-Buffle


Thy will, an't please thee.


Buffle, since this four or five days that thou have been with me, I have
received so good an Opinion of thy Wit, that I have now a project to Employ
thee in


I shall take Care of it to the besht of me Ability, if thou will be plain with
me in the matter


Why Mack, I must be Married, and I would have thee do the Office for me:
Can thou read the Service, and Act a Parson rarely, hah


Ee warrant thee, for ee have a Brother that is in Order, and ee have seen him
do it so often, that ee cannot mistake


That Is well said, I Will fit thee with a Habit presently, and then do it but
Cunningly and be the glory of thy Country


I warrant thee, I warrant thee, my Father Teg was a cunning Scab before me. --


Though to oblige my self I must put this new Trick upon the Widow, yet I cannot
in Conscience but contrive something to do her a kindness, and therefore
resolve to manage the Old Knight's Nephew, the Flanderkin, till he is fit for
my purpose, one Minute will do it, and then away brisk to my own Sir Philip;
Hark, I think I hear him already.


within. Ha, ha, ha, ha, --


Ay it is he, and I believe laughing at his shadow for want of a better Subject,
--

Oh Sir, you're come very opportunely -- Pray what is it provokes your Mirth so.


Why the oddest Jest that ever I knew in my Life, Faith and Troth, Ha, ha, ha,
ha, -- for upon the report of the Widows late good success you must know, I was
making fresh Love to her, and running after her down a pair of Stairs, where
the plaguey Jade her Maid, Ha, ha, ha, -- had thrown a hand^ul of Pease just
before; what does me I, but tumble down from Top to bottom Faith and Troth --
Ha, ha, ha, Gad I believe I Have broke two of my Ribs -- besides, spraining my
Leg, Ha, ha, ha, ha, -- did you ever know such a ^est.


No, by my Soul, never such a kind of J^st in my life.


My Head too, -- I Have a knob in that as big as a Turkey Egg, Ha, ha, ha, -- She
told me before a Cannon shot would not break it, and now I find her words true
Faith and Troth


Oh Sir, it is a great sign of Love, when she begins to play Frolicks with ye.


Why faith, I think so, though she has been plaguey cross to me of late too;
but, if I thought this was her way of making Love, Gad I Would go a^^ present her
the use of my Legs and Arms, and let her sprain and break 'em as she pleased,
let her but give me leave to Joke, and all the rest of my Members are at her
Service, faith and troth, ha, ha, ha, ha, a very good Jest faith


And truly, Sir, Yours is the most sensible sort of Love of any I ever heard
of; for a^ a famous Author has it

He that Hangs, or beats out's Brains,
The Devil's in him if he feigns.

Why it is very true; and that is very pretty, -- and so art thou too, ye little
brisk smug-fac'd Rogue, ha, ha, ha, -- Oh my Ribs, my Side, my Legs, -- ha, ha,
ha, -- a plaguey Jade, that was such a Jest to throw Pease upon the Stairs


Ah Sir, thereby hangs a story that would make your Ribs soon well again, if
you knew all. --


Say thou so* prithee what is it? my dear Mercury.


Nay, I think in Justice I ought to inform ye; therefore know Sir, the Widow
loves ye, and this Masquerade is I believe made chiefly for your sake


Ha, ha, ha, -- No, no, ye Jest, ye Jest.


Hush, lay your Finger upon your Mouth, -- here comes Company; and if your Legs
will give ye leave follow me, I Will tell ye more.


'Dsheart, if my Legs were off I Would follow thee upon this account.


'Dsdeath she has abused me beyond humane patience.


Oh you must never mind that, Captain; it is the way of some Women; You a Man of
War, and leave-off the Fight for a Chance shot or two, I Am ashamed on it, --
When shall we sup together again, the last Venison was very good as I Am a
Protestant


'Twas a sign so by your Eating indeed. --

Oh, when you pleas^, Madam, -- but hark ye, when is my Marriage to be.


Why thou shall have her to Night, -- are the Hundred Guineas ready?


All ready to Chink into your hand, Madam, if that were but done once.


Thou shall have her to Night then, I tell thee, she sent to thee to get a
Parson ready, did not she


Why yes, and I have one yonder; but the Devil take me if I am not afraid
she will have some damned freak or other in her head, and plague me again; see
yonder she comes, and that Fool Solon with her, whom I have not yet beaten; but
if he scapes when next I meet him, I Will give him leave to Rival me indeed


Yonder he is, and I must teize him once more, though I lose him by it, -- give me
your hand, Sir, why do you loyter so, -- You know I hate to have ye out of my
sight; and yet you are still so backward


Fond, by this light, and blames him for his Loitering.


She is not bewitched sure, is she.


O Lord! I vow and swear, Madam, I could outrun the swift win^'d Racers of the
Sky, as the Book says, to keep you Company, well, I vow th^t's a curious
thought, as a Man may say


I shall have no patience, -- Come Madam, what do you mean? the Man of God stays
yonder according to your Order


Oh, thank ye good Captain; I had forgot I vow.


Oh, she is coming to her self again, I see.


Sir you are extremely obliged to the Captain here, for his good will, fearing
that I should keep your passion off too long, he has provided here a Chaplain
for ye -- Come, Sir, I Am ready.


Death and Furies! a Chaplain for him.


I Vow and Swear he is the Civillest person that ever I met in my Life, as a Man
may say


Nay then, Rage shall take place; Scoundrel avaunt, and do you hear, Madam, do me
Justice instantly, and come and let the Parson do his Duty, or may I live
branded with the name of Villain, if here I throw not off all rules of Decency,
Manners, Respect, an^ Duty for your person, and carve out instantly my worst
Revenge in the Hearts blood of that ridiculous Monster


Why come then; Lord! what need you be in such a passion? If I must be yours, I
must be yours, -- and there is an end on it: -- God buy Solon, you see there is no
help sor't, -- Betty stay here, and ba^ter him as I instructed thee, --


I was plaguily afraid the freakish Jipsey would have made me lose my hundred
Guineas


A plague on it, what doings are here? Now foreward then backward; then this
way, and then the other way; now Chuck under the Chin, and next minute spet in
ones Face; why this is the very Devil, as a Man may say


Oh, Sir, don't trouble your self* this is only a trick upon the Captain; go
presently and dress your self for the Masquerade, and then rely upon me; I Will
give ye an account of her Habit, and you shall steal her off and Marry her in
spite of him


Why then, I vow and swear, that will be mighty neatly contrived; and I shall
have something in the bottom of my Pocket for thee too, Sweetheart, -- and if
I can but steal her away as thou say, I care not if I go to Loggerheads with
the blustering Captain every hour of the Day, as a Man may say


If I am not ashamed of my self; there is no Wisdom in Age and Experience; for
an Old Man as I am, whose dress should be grave and decent, and whose Actions
should be consequent to his Gravity, to come a Masquerading, Equipt thus
egregiously: ah it is Foppish and Vile: -- But then again, it is true, I Am a
Courtier, and the Fop is the less seen in me


For my part I never trouble my head about that, I Am no more a Fop now than I
used to be


Ah Boy, it is for thy sake that I Expose my self thus; the Widow has received
her Fortune again, I hear, and therefore we must turn the humor. Well Boy! but
what Answer did she make thee this Morning


Gad she was in the rarest humor that ever I saw her in my Life, faith; she
has appointed the hour, told me her Disguise, and I Am to steal her away to
night n Masquerade


Why, Blessing on her Heart, -- and my Opinion of her is mightily changed since
yesterday -- go go away Boy and watch her Motions -- my Son. -- Solon will be
provided for to night too, why, here will be such an hour of Coupling, gad, I
believe the Stars themselves will be all in Conjunction, and I Am glad on it at
my heart faith, -- how now, who comes here -- oh, I see the Humor holds
general, there are more Fools abroad than my self


So, My Dear, uow you are mine by Law, the Parson has done his part -- and I
think I Have done mine a little, -- and faith to get up the Chimney to come out
to me, was a very odd contrivance, that is the Truth


What do you think a Maid of my Age cannot contrive to come out to her Man, when
she has a mind to be Married, I Would have broke thown the Wall but I Would have come
to thee; if thwere only to spite my Father, I Will tea^h him to lock me up


That lisping Fool puts me in mind of my Peggy, that I have locked up at home.
--


Ay ay, now I have thee fast, let the old Heteroclite fret himself into a
Consumption, if he will, -- but see, here is some of the Masquers come already


Oh Lord, that is an old Woman, I Will go speak to her, -- How ^ow Grannum -- What
make you here, hah


I come a fooling as you do* What have you stole out from your Father's house,
through the Chimney, say ye


Yeth that I have, and have Married without hith leave, becauth I sound my self
capable


Indeed, -- What! and you are the happy Bridegroom, are ye Friend?


Instead of a better, Grannum, you will get little or nothing by us this time,
we can bring our selves together without ye, we shall have no ocasion for a
Bawd, Rot me


This must be the Rakehelly Lieutenant, I know him bp his Rot me.


But if you have a mind to try, how you can move your old Bones, and will Dance
at our Wedding, you must come away quickly, for we are just going to begi^


Ay ay, old Drybouth -- we are Jutht going to begin, ha ha ha


She has got my young Jades Tone exactly, by the Parliament I don't know what
to think on it -- if these young Queans can climb up Chimnies to get to their
Fellows, what a plague signifies Locks to our doors, -- I Will go afer 'em and be
resolv^d, for my Heart misgives me damnably. --


Base ^aithless wretch, have thou deceived me then.


It Is in vain to rail, Madam, Sir Philip has done me right, and you must excuse
me for frustrating your hopes upon so good an occasion; if we have wronged ye,
you know the Law is open


Ha ha ha -- Here they are faith, -- here is the glittering Damnation -- come
into my Clutches again Widow.


And I hope she will make thee pay for 'em, -- and since merely to abuse me thou
have Married -- for still I know thou hate it; May Discord, Jealousy, hated
Barrenness, with all the Curses of the Marriage-State, be thy perpetual Plague


Ay so it shall when I come into it, --
thi^ Crochet will do well upon my Hat, Widow, --

Out of my sight, or I shall Stab ye both.


Oh, nay, if you are so desperate, farewell to ye, -- come Lovewell, let us go and
peruse our Writings.


Fie, fie, this Rage is ridiculous -- what is done, is done, and though I cannot
wrong my sel^, nor part with my dear Philip, nor his Fortune, yet if you will
follow my Advice, Madam, and Marry, I Will help ye to a Fool and Fifteen hundred
a year, if that will make amends, nay, never boggle at it. -- Keep up good
Humor, let the Dance begin, and ere an hour is ended, he is your own


Thou art a very Devil, and thou can do any thing, there is no remedy, I see I
must take what thou will give me, lead on.


So, with much ado, she is mine at last, though I was damnably afraid at first,
all the time the Service was saying, that she would have played some freak or
other with the Parson, -- but, as it happens, she was more tame than I expected
-- well, Heaven send me good luck -- I Am sure I Have took pains enough about her


Who Is that, Darewell?


The same, my Lord, What is not the Dance begun yet?


Begun, what, without me, Fool, -- they may as well begin without the Fiddles*
I have kept 'em a little too long, it is true, but what do think I Have been
employed about


Nay, some mighty Affair, without doubt.


The greatest in the World, the Devil take me, -- thou art my Friend, I dare
trust thee, hark in thy Ear, -- I Am just now Married


Married, my Lord, why hark in your Ear then, So am I, this shall be called the
Marriage Masquerade, for I know of two Couple more, but to whom good my Lord


Why* to dear Pupsey -- I have been horribly in love with her a great while,
thou know'^t she is an extreme witty person, and they say, a great Fortune


She has been a High Flyer indeed my Lord, and to my knowledge, kept company
with Crowned Heads, but not worth a Groat, by Heaven.


She Is yonder amongst the Masquers, come Tarr, I believe you are but a wooden
Dancer, -- Observe me and it may do thee a kindness


AS soon as the Chaos was turned into Form,
And the first Race of Men knew a good from a harm,
They quickly did join,
In a Knowledge Divine,
That the chiefest of Blessings were Women and Wine;
Since when by example Improving Delights,
Wine Governs our Days, Love and Beauty our Nights.
Then Love on and Drink,
It Is a Folly to think
Of a Mystery out of our reaches*
Be Moral in Thought
To be Merry's no Fault,
Tho an Elder the contrary Preaches.
For never, my Friends, was an Age of more Vice,
Than when Knaves would seem Pious, and Fools would seem Wise.
Well, I swear your Lordship Dances like a little God.


And thou like a Goddess, my dear charming Heavenly -- ah Pox, there is no body
else here can move a Leg, -- yet says the Masquerade is extravagant enough, --
here is no body but Darewell, that I can guess at in the whole company -- ha ha
ha, I wonder who that bulky thing is


That must be my Lady Bumfiddle by her Obessity.


Her Obessity, What a Plague's that? -- her Belly, -- I see I must pick up my
old scraps of Learning again, my Spouse will overrun me else most damnably, but
my Dear, prithee where is Monsieur Le Chien


Oh my dear Dony, I had almost forgot him, I beg your Patience my Lord -- I Will
fetch him, and wait on ye again immediately --


to Sir Phil.] So, by this time, Hymen has been Sacrificed to sufficiently, no
less than ^ix Couple have lovingly paid their Devotion to his Altar, I Am sure


Six Couple, why their offspring well begot, in Twenty years time, may be
enough to Man a Fleet -- poor fool, there wants one Couple of the Six tho -- to
my knowledge --


The Devil take these Prolix doings, I begin to be very hungry.


That Is my Lady Bumfiddle, I wonder what she does for her Bumper all this while.


She has been putting me in mind of Supper three times within this half Hour.


If you were to ch^se -- what you liked, which would you have of all these?


There Is nothing worth having here, but there is a Westphali^ Ham and Pigeons in
the next room, I Would choose that if I might


This is somewhat rude La Pupsey, to your Betters, I must tell y^u that.


my Betters, poor Creature, prithee my Lord tell her who I a^, whilst I walk by
and smile


Madam, your Fault springs from your Ignorance, but hence^orth remember this
Lady is my Wife, Dammy


Why then, with my Lady's pardon, -- I hope she will thank me, at lea^t, for all
the old Gowns I Have given her -- for tho she be your Wife now my Lord, she was
lately Retainer to our Caball, and formerly a Player. --


The Devil was in me to provoke her, all will out now I see, there is ^o remedy.
--


A Player, ha ha ha, why now you Rave, Madam, -- Darewell, thou can witness
the contrary of that, thou toldst me her Breeding was such, that she has been
familiar with Kings and Queens


Ay my Lord in the Playhouse, I told ye she was a High Flyer too, that is, I
have seen her upon a Machine in the Tempest


In the Tempest, why then I suppose I may seek her fortune in the enchanted
Island, what a plague you have tricked me then Fubbs, have ye


Tricked ye my Lord, that is a phrase I confess I understand not yet, but if you
design to be Acid, I can have patience tho you are never so Acrilogical, it is
all one to me, it is the same thing in the Greek*


Greek, the Devil* take all Learning, I say, 'dsdeath are these the joys of
Marriage


The Joys of Marriage, ha ha ha ha, a very good Jest, faith; I have most share
in that, I Am sure. Where is this Sir Philip, now let him produce himself, that
I may laugh at him immoderately, ha ha ha ha, for I have Married the Widow and
wiped his Nose, Faith and Troth, ha ha ha


Thou have got indeed the Shell of the Widow, but her Kernel, the Writings and
Jewels are under Lock and Key in my ^ustody, ha ha ha ha


He Is downright Mad, Faith and Troth, -- thou the Jewels, speak Spouse, and
consute the silly Knight --


Why, the Truth is, Sir, he has got the Writings and Jewels again; but now I
have got you with an Estate, Sir, we'll swinge him off a^ Law


Law! -- nay, if you talk of Law already, I Have caught a Tartar ^aith and Troth.


Sure my Eyes don't dazzle* What can be the meaning of this?


What a Plague, is the Widow split in two then? for I have one half of her here.


Not half a Widow, but a whole Maid at your Service, Sir. --


Oh! Mrs. Comode, I wish ye much Joy. --


Why, this is Witchcraft, by the Parliament, now I Am serious.


What a pox have I got, the Widows Bed-warmer, and instead of 70000 Ducats, the
lawful Inheritrix to 7 pair o^ worn-out Laced Shoes, and a Dozen of old Combs;
go Troop Troop, my Brother Solon will laugh me to death, -- he has got a ^ine
Lady and a Fortune.


Not the Lady you mean I can assure ye Sir, as this can witness, I have laid
her aboard my self. --


Why then, as I hope to be saved, I cannot tell what to make of all this, I was
to take her away in this disguise, and now he has got her, and if I have not
Married her, I Will take my Oath on it I Have Married the Devil in her shape, as a
Man may say


You have Married one, Sir, that has had a tender care for your Person a long
time, I assure ye --


Ha ha ha -- Here Is Matrimony like Grapes in Clusters, Faith -- I Am glad I Have
'scap'd squeezing.


Oh Betty, I wish thee good luck, take care and make a good Wife, do you hear?


You have neither good Bubbies nor a good Face, -- therefore Troop Troop, as my
Brother Bias says.


Well Sir, the Law will give us Allie Money, and that is all we care for --


My two Sons Married to two Chamber-maids -- and by a Trick, -- nay then, there
seldom comes two Mischiefs but there is a Third, -- by your leave Mistress -- I
believe you and I have some intimacy --


Well well, what care I, heerth my Huthband -- And you are an old fribling,
fulsome, foolish, feeble, fumbling fornicating Fellow, for all y're my Father,
to lock up me, tho ye are


Ay, i knew 'twas she -- here is your coy, skittish Queen for ye, -- they are all
so, they Sneak and Prim in public, as if Butter would not melt in their
Mouths, but they are very Devils in a corner


Well well, Sir, pay her her Six thousand pounds -- and then Rail as much as
you think good, Rot me


Do You hear Friend, you know you are a Coward, and I know you are Cashiered, and
therefore if you get one ^arthing of her Fortune, why then -- Rot me


He Is in the right Callow* your business is done at Court, I told ye what would
come of your herding with the Factious Party


Why now, one may walk Horses, and the other may Spin, a very hopeful Match
indeed


There never comes better luck when the Blockheads don't Consult me, I have
always observed it as I Am a Protestant


It Is very hard they should pick out only me, there are more Officers in the
Regiment, and some, that to my Knowledge, how fair soever they carry it, are as
Factious as my self, Burn me


And by degrees will be all gleaned out I hope, -- A R^t in an Army is a
dangerous thing -- but Sir Lawrence, Have your new Affairs entirely taken up
your Memory, that you forget your Servant Lovewell. --


Lovewell, I Am amazed, why thou look like a very Woman.


And as very a Woman I am, old Knight, as ever you knew in your life, that has,
to right former Injuries, and help the Marriage-hater here to a good Wife, that
may be the occasion of his Salvation hereafter, lived thus long in disguise in
your Family, and instead of Brother to your Friends Daughter Phaebe, that was
debauched, you here behold the very Phaebe her self, Sir


H^ day! why this is an hour of Wonders.


The Marriage-Hater Caught at last, ha, ha, ha.


The Marriage-Hater Caught at last, ha, ha, ha.


Hold, hold, good Ladies, -- pray let me Explain my self a little, lest your
Extravagant Mirth should not hold out well to the end; it is true my Dear, as
thou say, I am Married


Ay, Child, I know it; and thou have made me the happiest Creature breathing.


With all my Heart; would I could marry fifty a day at the same rate, for such
a Fortune, -- Buffle, come Sirrah, off with your Disguise; Look ye, Child, --
resolving not to let any Female Wit ever have the better of me* I have
over-reached thee with another trick, faith, and a^ Married by my Valet de
Chamber; so that, instead of dull, drowzy Wedlock, I am just in the Predicament
as I was before, ha, ha, ha, ha, --

How now! What a Devil art thou. --


A Mini^ter of the Word* and shall please thee.


A Minister; what a plague have I to do with a Minister? -- where is Buffle?


He is at the Door there; he did desire me to do for thee this good office.


Peace Hell-hound, Screech-Owl, Black-Coat, Slave, -- by the Fu^ies I Am caught
in my own Snare. --

How now, Rogue; what mistake is this?


I desire thou will not be angry, I have done all for thy good indeed.


Ah sordid Villain, I Will Murder thee --


Oh, prithee, Sir Philip, -- no Passion now; let us hear what the Fellow says.


Why, what is there occasion for all this broken Face now; have ee not done all
things for the besht, indeed; -- thou did deseer me to learn the way of the
Marriage, for thee; and by Chr^esht ee did learn and learn, and ee did forget
again indeed; -- and then for fear that I should mistake ee did desee^ my
Brother, who is in Orders, and whose Trade it is -- instead of my shelf, to do
it well for thee; and vare is the harm of this


Hell and the Devil! Oh Ignorant Dog; that I could but get at that Nose of
thine


Go, go, get ye both gone; and here is twenty Guineas to Cure your Face, Friend;
away I say, --

'Slife how near had I been lost again; this is the luckiest turn that ever
happened


Faith, Freewit, you are snapt too, -- you are in our Row now, in spite on
thee, I Am glad he has married his Wench, that he may not laugh at me for my
bargain there, -- for the Devil take me, if I don't begin to be ashamed of her
already.


Well, ^or my part, since Chance must rul^ the Roast in spite of all
Endeavors, I Will be a fond doting Fool no longer, -- Let my Son Bias be Pox'd
if he pleases; my hopeful Son Solon hang himself in his hopeful Wifes Garters,
and let my Daughter turn Doll Common to the Army: -- I Will please my self as
long as I can by the Parliament; keep a good Table to get me Reputation; drink
the King's Health to show my Loyalty* keep a good Horse in my Stable, and a
hand^ome Wench for my Housekeeper, and there is the res^^^tion of an old
Courtier; now I Am serious in good Earnest


Say ye so old Dew-beater; why then I Will do like all those Sons whose Fathers
are^ as you have been, -- Spend all I can in your Life time; Drink Bumpers to
your good passage, when I hear you are dying; and forget ye before ye are
buried


I Am sure it is you have been the occasion of my miscarriage; for you would have
me Marry, though I was no more fit for a Wife, ^han a Cow is for a Saddle, as a
Man may say


Come Sister, what grown dull with your new Fortune? You may be glad it happens
so well; Come, come, be merry for shame, and Cheer up your Husband there, I
swear he is down in the Mouth


And will be worse down, I believe, before I Have done with him. -- Why, it seems
he had the Impudence to expect a Fortune with me; it is a Proverb indeed; that
often by Chance, Fools may have Fortune; -- but that a Widow ever gave a
Fortune to a Fool, is a President yet to make, at least till she was come to
her time of dotage: -- Come, come, Laugh, Sir, Laugh


This is the only thing in the World that I cannot Laugh at, Faith and Troth;
First, to Marry one that cares not if I were hanged; and then to be frustrated
of her Fortune, which is the only thing a Widow is good for; one too that has
the Impudence to ^^ll me Fool the first minute of our Marriage, and without
doubt will make me a Cuckold the next; t'has quite balk'd me; I could not Laugh
if I might get a thousand pounds by it, -- I could rather weep, faith and troth,
--


Ha, ha, ha, ha, -- a pox on it you must strive against Melancholy, Man, -- it is
the worst disease for a f^llow of thy Kidney in the World; besides to begin
with it, upon thy Wedding Day, it is ominous; for my part I have been venturing
too here, but am resolved to be merry, come what will on it


You shall have no cause to be otherwise, Sir, all my freaks are now ended,
they were only to try your humor, Sir, and have all made their Exit with my
change of Condition; I am now as tractable a plain dull silly House-dove, as if
I had been in twenty Sea-sights with ye, or had come under your Lee, for as
many Years


Well! what fortune I shall get by my Marriage, I find is a Riddle, but I am
sure to have Rhetoric in abundance, -- if slorid words could be sum'd into
pounds, I were certain of Ten thousand of 'em in an hours time: -- I hope
Madam, I may take place of Monsieur L'Chien ^oo; it is time for our Rivalship to
end now


Yes, my Lord, says he, I shall be proud to yield to your Lordship in any thing
says he, yet I have had many a sweet Night with my dear says he, Ay my dear
Life's-blood so thou have. -- Well! my Lord may be as angry as he pleases --
but if I Have a hundred Children by him, I shall never love one of 'em half so
well. --


Why, what a glut of Weddings are here, -- and but one Supper to 'em all, this
is pitiful Management, as I Am a Protestant


I vow, I could wish, methinks, the Frolic had gone thorough* my Niece and I
here, are the only uncoupled in the whole Company


Which was neither of our faults, Aunt, I Am sure.


Come, ^^r Philip; Fate is Inevitable, and it is in vain to resist its decree,
for my part I Will wear my Yoke, if it chance to be a Yoke, with all the Patience
imaginable; -- and when the Marriage Courtship is a little over, to Sea again,
and Court the Foe in Thunder, -- Our Fleet is Royal, Hearts I hope are found
too

And let our Loyal Union, be well framed;
If ever then we are baffled, I Will be damned.

And now, Sir, passion being a little over, I hope you will own what I have done
was just; and since to help the failures of my Wit, a special Act of Providence
befriended me, be pleased to look on me with Eyes of Pity

For you might have, Sir, to Indulge your life,
A new^r Bride, but not a better Wife.

Give me thy hand, -- I am Convinced this moment, that Marriages the Bliss or
Plagues of Life, are as thou say, all the Effects of Providence; and to
begin the Reverend Estate Soberly, -- first I will Execute Justic^* Therefore,
as to you, Madam, -- Solomon's Estate appears your due, shall justly be
surrendered. -- My Spouse, and I shall have enough to Eat with, and cooly enjoy
our selves like old Acquaintance, that long have fed on the Baked meat of
Matrimony: And since the Stars, with their propitious Influences, in spite of
my Opinionated Wit, have used me like a Vermin in a Trap

Patient, I Will Relish pleasure dearly bought,
And Chaw on the same Cheese, with which I Am caught.

TWo Heads they say are best, I and the Dog
Ioyn therefore, to perform the Epilogue:
And first, before we excuse what the Poet Writ,
Your humble Conge, Dony, to the Pit.
Gallants, says he, I must presume to Crave
The Privilege that all Young Actors have;
Who tho they often blunder to a Crime,
Are certain of your pardon the first time.
And though I want the Management of Tongue,
And have said little, yet you know I Have Sung.
Ay, so thou have my dear Felicity:
So much for Dony, now the rest for me.
I Swear, I quake to think, though not intended,
How many here may chance to be offended;
Who often when their Lovers cannot succeed,
Smuggle a Creature of my Dony's breed.
For as a Babe of Seven,
To imitate the Married Couples Brood,
Will play with their resemblance made in Wood,
So Infants of Eighteen that want success,
To Catch the greater Donys play with less.
This amongst others, Gallants, to your view,
We now present ye all as humors new;
Without the least r^flection or Abuse:
And if you now Impartial Candor use,
Then to your Service we shall still apply
Your most Obsequious Humble Dog and I.
NAY, Madam, there is no turning back alone;
Now you are Entered, faith you must go on;
And speak the Prologue, you for those are Famed,
And the Play's beginning.

Would the Play were Damned:
I shall never wish the Poet good Success;
For putting me into this nauseous Dress;
A Dress, which of all other things I hate;

That Is very strange, faith, since thy L^gs are straight;
For if thou had a thousand Lovers here,
That very Garb, as thou do now appear
Takes more than any Manto we can buy,
Or Wir'd Comode, though Cocked Three Stories high,

I hate this Coat, this Masculine Hat too here,
These Breeches, and the other things I wear.

Not all things, Madam, now you are too severe
When the Disguise, no lewdness does expose:
Breeches, as Modestly themselves disclose,
As Petticoat that reaches to your Toes.

Let all loose Dresses to loose Minds belong,
Men, nor their Garbs did ever my Credit wrong.

That Is much faith having known the Stage so long.
Well, we'll allow your Modesty is Famed,
Come now, -- the Prologue*

Lord, I Am so ashamed.


A Player, and ashamed, that may be true.


You think sure I Am as impud^nt as you.


No Child; you would not do then as you do;
You would not lose a Fortune for a Toy,
Nor frown nor blush whenever you Act a Boy;
Or speak a Prologue, which you must do now,
And to assist you see, I Will make your Bow.

Well Gentlemen, since then do what I can,
Spite of my self, I must appear a Man;
Pray let me beg ye* not to like me less
Than when you see me in my Maiden Dress;
And free from ^^^rous Censure this one day
For my sake spare the Poet and the Play.
For to speak Truth in its encouragement,
There is a Plot, and some good Humor in it:
The Ladies too must needs approve the Matter,
Because be punishes the Marriage-hater.
And if you bring go^d Humor, you shall laugh,

Why, that is well said my Dear, and so let us off.


BOnny Lad, prithee lay thy Pipe down;
Though blithe are thy Notes they have now no power:
Whilst my Joy my dear Peggy is gone,
And Wedded quite fro me will Love no more.
My good Friends that do ken my grief,
With Songs and Stories, a Cure would find:
But alas, they can bring no relief,
For Peggy still runs in my mind.
When I Visit the Park or the Play,
They aw without Peggy a Desert seem;
She Is before my Eyes aw the Day,
And aw the long Night too, she haunts my Dream.
Sometime fancying a Heaven of Charms,
I wake, and Robbed of my dear delight,
Find she Ligs in another Arms:
Ah then it is she kills me outright.
Take my Counsel aw you that love well;
Bestow Love and Wit on a Girl of Sense:
No such Blessing to Peggy befell,
'Twas Ignorance caused her absurd offense.
She could pray with an humble face;
And look as she never false could be:
But had she owned either Wit or Grace,
She never had Wedded fro me.

