FRenchlove is come then it seems.


I spoke with one that saw him?


And what Composition is the Man -- of since his Travels.


Why I am told, that he is absolutely composed of Frigaces and Essences.


A very admirable character of a man, I p^rcieve he is e^ne no better, nor no
worse, than an effected English man -- translated into a ridiculous French man
-- I believe such a fellow as thy -- were he but given to Poe^ry -- would be
continually making of Verses in praise of French Tailors -- French Cooks -- and
French Merchants -- which are but of the lower rank of English P^lars


Well -- I am very glad he is returned so accomplished a person -- to make sport
with -- he will serve to pass away many a tedious hour -- and make us laugh
more then a wiserman --


Faith you are in the right -- ^'me resolved he shall be our Physi^ian for the
Spleen


You know we have another too a; eminent in folly as he, though in a different
kind -- you guess who I mean


Who Mr. Vain?


The very same, that fellow is a Coxcomb of great value, his humor is very
pleasant, he loves to be thought a debauch, in all kinds, and is none; brags of
his, great acquaintance with women -- and their kindness to him, and yet he
knows not one in the whole Town


Prithee look yonder and behold the approaching shadow of the man we were
talking of: Substance he has none


The Gentleman spies us already.


I see Mr. Welbred and Mr. Comely, now I will speak so loud to my Boy, that
they may hear -- Sirrah, go to those six several Ladies that sent to my Chamber
this morning, and say your Master cannot possibly wait on them to night -- and
d'hear Sirrah, take heed that on^ Ladies Chambermaid does not dog you to the
next Ladies Lodging, for their jealousy makes them as watchful over me as so
many Cats


O -- impudent Rascal


And when you return with your answers, Be sure remember to deliver the same
messages to me As you are wont to do before Company


I believe that word in private, Is to instruct the boy what message he is to
bring back


Make have Sirrah.


Yes, yes Sir, -- now must I stay just such a time away, as I might really have
dispatched these feigned errands -- -- To these six Ladie-No-bodies -- and then
return with Six huge lies -- now let all the world be judge if there Can be
such another Rogue as my Master


Mr. Vain, we overheard you Message to your boy, you are A happy man, wrapped in
your mother's smock


What de'e mean Sir.


Nay never let your modesty deny what we heard, no Less then women by the half
dozen in love with you -- Very good! when other men are writing
Petitioning-Letters For admittance, -- you are sending excuses that you cannot
come


Well Gentlemen, since you have overheard me against My will, I wonder you
should think me happy, that Am troubled with the importunity of so many women


If that be your misfortune, Sir, would you would make us Sharers with you, and
bring us acquainted with some Of these Ladies -- we would help to ease your
burden


Alas Sir, they poor hearts would take it unkindly From me, because their
affections are particularly to My person


We don't question that, but by your slighting them We might get into favor.


Troth I have used them to that a great while, and do not find it lessens me in
their esteem -- past the recovery Of a kind visit


Are you acquainted, Sir, with the widow, my Lady Wealthy.


I Sir, I think I am.


She Is a great Fortune, I wonder you don't think of marrying her.


Faith, Sir, I Am too great a Libertine to think of settling -- Pox on it, I made
a great debauch last night with wine And women


This fellow is the wonder of impudency


Sir, an please you the Ladies are very much unsatisfied They cannot rest till
they behold you


Blook-head who bid you deliver your message aloud When you see company by?


E'ne your lying Worship --


Well -- Gentlemen I must beg your excuse, that I Cannot wait upon you any
longer at this time


'Twere uncivil to desire it, Sir, hearing your urgent occasions, Your humble
servant. It Is impossible to believe there could be any such fellow as this --
in nature -- did we not know him -- now let us go make a visit to Frenchloves


Agreed.


Now, do wonder at my self of all men living, what kind of devil possesses me,
to make me do these things. I excuse my absence to six women, that know not
one, as many as there are in this town -- I told them too, I was drinking and
wenching last night -- if I were, 'twas my Landladies small beer, and she was
my wench, whose body is now so old, that death has laid claim to it by course of
nature above these forty years -- I cannot imagine how I first came to be of his
humor, unless 'twere hearing the Orange Wenches talk of Ladies and their
Gallants. So I begun to t^ink I had no way of being in the fashion, but
bragging of Mistrisses


Sir, I think I deserve more then two Liveries a year in your Worship* service
-- because I think I do more business then other Gentlemen's footmen


In what boy;


In lying for your Worship an't please ye:


Well sirrah I Will consider of it.


He dares not deny me for fear i will betray him.


Hei Lacquies go to Le Fronys and bespeak for my supper a Pottage, a Frigacie,
and some lardid Patridge, Attande vo^s


Ovy Mon --


Curre ^ll Mont* It Is some comfort yet that in t^is vast Beef-eating Ci^y, a
French house may be found to eat at -- for the most of the streets I have rode
through from the Bridge to Covent Garden, are Butcher rows, where I saw the
butchers strewing the fle^h of their distressed Beefs with Rosemary as the
English do a Corpse at a Funeral. The Devi^ in*t that this England should be my
Country, I cannot think my self the least a kin to it, since I have been in
France, 'twould vex me plaguly were I not a Frenchman in my second nature (that
is) in my fashion, discourse and clothes. I cannot devise it: this whole City
of London, how to find out any one Divertisement, Let me see (first) I must go
ask blessing of my Father and Mother. Diabol! what a damned English fashion is
that, then they cry O welcome Son, you must stay and dine with us, we have a
good rump of Beef in the pot for dinner: A rump of the Devil, that I should
have an English father and mother, and they a French son


Monsieur your French supper shall be ready presently.


Et bein, methinks there is a gust in that* word French supper, but the very
sound of an English supper, takes away the stomach of a person that is well bred


Mr. Frenchlove, you are welcome into England, and to Spring Garden -- I
suppose this to be the best Diversion we can enter (...) you with, since it is a
place will afford the sight of all our English Beauties


Sir, I thank you, but you must pardon me; if the memory of French Ladies be so
fresh in me, that I doubt I shall hardly esteem the English women equal to them


Sir we will not tell the Ladies your mind, for fear they should despair,
yonder are some of them, if you please let us -- walk up toward them, and
discourse


O -- Madam yonder is Mr. Welbred, and the new arrived Mr. Frenchlove.


By what I have heard, he is a sight worth seeing.


Look how he throws his legs as if he would fain be rid of them -- what
distance there is between 'em -- I believe there are not a pair of legs in the
whole Town so great strangers one to another as his


Oh fie I surfeit of those Ladies already.


What before you see their faces.


They are so narrow with their feet that they but, in France they will not give
a Souse for a Horse that does so


No more will they in England.

Madam Mr. French love newly come out of France. I need not tell you how
accomplished a person Since his Boon mean will answer for him


You Are welcome into England, Sir, you are come to run the hazard of English
women falling in love with you, and that we are apt to do with persons so much
Frenchified as your self


Madam I confess though an English Nurse taught me to go, a French
Dancing Master taught me to walk


Sir, I guest that seeing you come toward us. It sets us women already a
longing to see you dance, I hope you will grant us that savor upon better
acquaintance


Madam I am sorry I cannot promise it, for I doubt my ear will not endure the
scraping of English Fiddlers, since I have been used to the sound of the French
Violins


Sir I fear all our diversions in England will be but Dis^ses to your nature.


Truly Madam, unless they were French, I shall not affect them at any rate --
-- I Am very sorry I can continue no longer in the honor of your Ladyships
company, for I am going to employ my Eyes in the view of some French Clothes
and Garnitures that are newly brought me out of France, which is a business of
grand concern to a person that has seen the world


Sir, we will not detain you from so great an affair, What ever our
inclinations are to your company


Madam I hope you will be pleased to suffer a personal visit from me,


What a Devil does he mean by a personal visit,

Sure he does not mean to send his Lacquie as an Envoy,


Mr. Welbred, I confess you are not worse Then your word in showing us this
Monsieu


Madam the reason why London is more pleasant to live in, Then the Country is
because all sorts of fools come to it


Indeed I think this fellow not inferior to any kind of Ass, that ever yet I
saw -- pray let us make good use of him


Madam my life on it, we will handle him to the best advantage but -- hark ye --
one word in private as to the old business, when will ye marry me


Old business d*e call it, sure it is new to you, for you have not me yet.


Pish, pray tell me when ye will marry me.


When will I marry you -- when will I love ye, you should ask me first.


Why don't ye.


Why do I, did you ever hear me say I did


I never heard you say you did not.


I Will say so now then if you long.


By no means say not a thing in have, you may Repent at leisure.


Come leave your fooling or I Will swear it.


Don't widow, for then you will lie too.


Indeed it seems it is for my money then you would have me.


For that and something else you have.


Well, I Will lay a wager thou have lost all thy money at Play, for then you are
always in a marrying humor. But do you hear Gentleman, do you think to gain me with
this careless way, or that I will marry one I don't think is in love with me


Why I am.


Then you would not be so merry, people in Love are sad and many times weep.


That will I never do for thee widow.


And why?


'Twould argue me a child, and I am confident if thou did not verily believe
I were a man, I should never be thy Husband -- weep for thee -- ha, ha, ha, --
if e're I d


Go hang your self.


Thank you for your advice.


Well then shall I see you again?


When I have a mind to it -- Come, i will lead you to your Coach for once.


And i will let you for once --


'Twere brave if we could get his custom.


I doubt it not, I Have workt for his Family above this twenty years. I warrant
thee, if he accept of me for his Tailor i will prefer you for his Milliner


This is his Lodging, -- let us knock,


Qui est la:


What do he say kill.


Sir, we would wait upon the Right Honorable Mr. Frencklove


That be my Matre, me tell him


I don't like these French faces about him, they will persuade him from buying
of us

God bless your Honor, you are welcome into England again, I have made many a
white coat for your Worship, when you were a child, I workt for your Father
these twenty years, and hope to have your Honors custom, I have brought Suites
ready made up, for your Honor to see


And who is that other man?


A Milliner that has the best choice in the Exchange.


Why these are all English things you show me.


Yes Sir we knew what would please your worship.


Ye are two mistaken Cockines.


What means he by Cockines?


It Is Rogues in English, I heard two Frenchmen call one another so in the
street, and a man that stood by, interpreted the words to me


We are like to sell much ware then.


Mounsieur -- the Merchant of France and the Mounsieur Tailor of France are
come


Bring 'em in.


Plague of his French throat, I had rather he would brought news of two Devil's, we
shall be finely served now


Mounsieur we have brought you the new fashions of France for Clothes and
Gairntures. Mounsieur Le Merchant and my self sold the same to the King of
France for the last grand ball


See the difference of the French fashions and the damned English.


You have the English Tailor and the Pedlar in your Chamber, begar they look
like sheep


Say you so Frenchmen you shall find us wolves.


Do You hear me Gentlemen, if you stay I Will give you forty Candies of Battons
for your ware


An't please your Worship, how much is that in English money? for we shall take
any reasonable price to gain your Custom


Why that sum in English, comes to forty swinging blows with an extreme tough
cudgel


O Sir we can'^ take that, our ware stood us in more.


O -- Mr. Englishman you understand some French.


May I never eat slice of liquid beef again, had I that French Rogues Tongue in
my mouth if I would not bite it off as close to the root as ever Barber sha^'d
beard


We will watch their coming out and beat 'em


Agreed.


Well, what is your lowest price of these things?


Ma foi, a hundred Pistol.


Lacquie, bid my Vale de Chamber pay a hundred Pistol -- adieu.


Mounsieur votre serviteur tres humble:

We did much disgrace the English Man's.


Begar me laugh to think how they sneakt away.


And do you know the faces of those Englishmen again if ye see them.


Methinks they be very much like you in visage.


You are in the right, we are the men you called sheeps in Mounsieurs Chamber.


Begar me no like that they have -- the English anger in their face, now would
me could take five strides for one to be rid of 'em


My fine Mounsieur we staid here to have the honor of being better known to
you, and do intend to do your ears the favor in making them acquainted with
our fists. -- Therefore thus with our fists we salute your ears


Is this the English fashion to take acquaintance? begar the English butcher
takes acquaintance with his Calf -- so that he bills him


The French Gentleman does no fight with his hands, but with his Rapier,
therefore we challenge you to meet us to morrow in the field to give Mounsieur
la Merchant and my self satisfaction


Well we will meet you to morrow in Southampton fields, -- there we shall be
private


THis life of mine can last no longer than my Beauty, and though it is pleasant
now, I want nothing whilst I am Mr. Welbred's Mistress, yet if his mind should
change, I might e'ne sell Oranges for my Living, and he not buy one of me to
relieve me. It came into my head last night that this ridiculous fellow Mr.
Frenchlove I might get for my Husband by the help of fortune, and a little
Parson that uses to marry privately. If I could but light handsomely into his
Company, I am confident I know a rare way to tickle this Trout. They say he
affects all things that are French, and despises English, therefore will I
affect the garb of a French woman, and jear at all English women and their
fashions. This is the French shop where he uses to buy Essences and Gloves,
thither will I go. And if I can meet him luckily, I shall feel his pulse to
know what Physic is fit for my Mounsieur's Diseases -- yonder comes the
Mounsieur, my wished for object

Fortune begins as if she would be my friend. Have you any thing that is newly
come out of France


Ouy Madam, me have all the rarest things of Paris, the smell of the Orange
Jessemy, Violet and Rose, all grow in my Gloves and Essences as natural as upon
the trees


Come show me some French Pendants and Gloves of^ the pretty French fancy.


Madam, I shall show you the Rarity of France.


I must make use of some Discourse to please this

French love's ears -- I came from the Exchange, where I saw a flock of English
Ladies buying taudry trimmed Gloves, of the dull English fancy; Pink, Scarlet
and Yellow together one chose; another Black, Red and Blew, and Pendants like
Hawks Bells, and these Ladies were making themselves fine for a Ball in the
City, where they enamour the hearts of every foreman of the shop, and they to
express their passions, instead of languishing, eye-casts and sighs do stare
and groan, as if they were giving up the Ghost for those Ladies


This must be some person of Quallity that has been in France, I know by her
despising the English women


Such Ladies as these are fit for our dull English Gentry, give me a young
Gallant that after his being in France, returns so well bred, that he laughs at
his own Country -- the fool looks pleased at my discourse, he shall have more
on it


I must speak to her, she has charmed my eyes and ears.

Madam let me not appear a rude English man, by this presumption, of speaking
to you, if it be a crime, you ought to pardon it, for I have seen no woman
since my coming out of France, that would cause my admiration, but your self,
besides your Celestial beauty, I adore the truths I heard spoke by your fair
tongue


It Is my opinion, Sir, concerning our English Nation.


O -- Madam your opinion is beautiful as well as your face.


Here Mounsieur how much must you have for your gloves*


Twenty, Madam.


There is eighteen -- Sir your servant.


O Madam, I must be farther bold:


In what Sir?


In beging leave to kiss your Ladyships hand.


Sir though I would not coyly refuse you -- like an English woman, yet I know
not how to grant that


I most humbly beg it.


It Is not modesty in me upon this small acquaintance.


Madam if you will give a beggar a piece of Pread that is starving, deny me not
this Alms


Well Sir I am loath to let you sue for so small a thing, yet I must blush and
turn away my head to grant it


Heaven reward your Charity.


Your servant Sir.


Give me leave to wait on you to your Coach.


Now help me Fortune, and I Will snap wise Mr. Frenchlove in an English trap.


These French Rogues are not come yet.


But what shall we do with this Mattock and Spade.


I Will secure thee, they are weapons shall do us more good Then our Swords,
let us fall a digging a couple of Graves


Well and what of that.


Why I believe the very sight of it will be so terrible to our two Frenchmen,
that mere fancy will make them turn Astrologers in their own defense, and guess
the sat of their own Stars, -- is for them to be buried in these two Graves
we are digging, if they fight with us -- O yonder they come


The devil a one English man be here.


Begar me post 'em up in Paris for the two Coward.


And me tell the King of France's Tailor, come let us begone.


Dee hear you Frenchmen stay a little, the two English Cowards you think will
not come, are here already


Me have no one eye then to see 'em.


Yes yes, cast your French eye a little this way, and you will see the men you
challenged


O -- methink you be the men.


Indeed we are so, and have been digging two Graves to bury you two in, and now
are ready for you

Nay pray hold a little before we go to it,

Mr. French Tailor -- I must take measure of you.


Why do you do so Mr. English.


Only to see if I have made your grave fit? Faith it is just, now as concerning
our wager, I will lay thee the price of the triming a suite of Clothes, that I
hit my Frenchman at the first thrust, in the swallow, that he shall never eat
again


And I will lay thee the making up of a suite of Clothes, that I cleave my
Frenchmans head just in the middle, for I Am resolved to fight with this
Mattock, therefore deliver up both your Swords, and agree to all our demands;
first give us half the money you took for your ware in Mr. Frenchlove's Chamber,
when you hindered us of -- Custom: in the next place, when ever we have any
thing to sell, you shall carry it to him, and say it came out of France


Well Mr. Englishmen, we'd dye before we would do this, if it were not to teach
you two rude Englishmen Complizance


Come prethree let us contrive how to make some sport with Vain and Frenchlove.


Let Us invite my Lady Wealthy and the other Ladies to a Ball, and have
Frenchlove and Vain there


Agreed, I like it well.


I would not expect a better beginning, then my first opportunity, I will
impart my design to Mr. Welbred -- O yonder he is


Mrs. Crafty well met, your head looks full of business.


I have some with you Sir --


You have non that I will not do, if it lies in my power.


I thank you Sir (then this it is) I suppose you know Mr. Frenchlove.


Very well, would you were married to him.


Shall I have your assistance?


Withal my heart.


I have been in his company already, I heard of a French Shop he frequented,
there I designed to meet him, there I did, and affected the garb and humor of
a French woman, hearing he despised all English: I could not expect better
success in my first adventure, then I found. For he seemed to like me so well,
that he begged leave to wait on me at my Lodging, to which I seemed very
unwilling, but at last granted it, not a word of this to Mr. Comely


Why so, by all means let him know it, he is a person will assist you.


Fie Mistress Crafty, I take it ill you bid Welbred not tell me of your design,
I shall further it all I can, you have a fister too that am obliged to, whom I
will endeavor to get married to Mr. Vain


I thank you Sir, Mr. Welbred your Servant, I cannot stay now, for I expect
Frenchlove at my lodging


These two fellows, Frenchlove and Vain are like to be well Wiv'd.


I hope the plot will take; -- here comes my Lady Wealthy, and other Ladies.


Madam, this fine Evening is our friend since it has brought you hither.


'Troth Welbred had I thought to have met no other Company then you, I should
not have come


That is to say, you would not have come two hours ago, when I was not here --
but you would have come now Widow


Well Sir, i will have nothing to say to you till you can leave this impudent way
of Discourse -- Mr. Comely, when shall we have the fiddlers and be merry


As soon as you will command them Madam.


To night then, and let us have Frenchlove and Vain.


I dare engage for Frenchlove, but for Vain I know not what to say, for he is a
fellow that so belies all Women, that I could never get him near any


I never saw this ^ellow yet --


No, nor never shall Madam -- for we asked him one day if he were acquainted
with you; and he answered us with a counterfeit smile -- as much as to say, he
was intimately, so that he will as soon be shut up with a Lioness in her Den,
as come near you


This fellow shall be your Rival, for he is yet a degree more impudent then you.


Away, I shall never live to see him or any man else, My Rival.


How now manners, de'e think I cannot love no body else but you.


I think as good, I think you shall not.


Take heed young man you will show your teeth too soon,


Faith Widow I Will show thee all I have to do thee good.


Who comes here?


Upon my life Frenchlove with his Mistress.


Why who is that.


One Mrs. Crafty.


That gentlewoman I hear has been very civil to you.


If she has Madam, I am endeavoring to return it, in geting her married to Mr.
Frenchlove


That shows good nature in you, but I dout you will want a Wife your self then.


No that I shall not do as long as you live.


Well Sir, please your self with that fancy.


Madam let us conceal our selves in this Arbor, we shall either see or hear
some very pleasant thing of Frenchlove as he walks with his Lady


Madam, leading your Ladyship put's me in mind of France.


Why Sir.


Because you lead so like the French Ladies.


This is because you lead me like the French Gentlewomen.


O -- cunning Wench.


I must confess I do so Madam, and really unless a person has been long in
France, he knows not how to lead a Lady with a boon grace


Sir, why look you so earnestly on the ground.


I Will lay a hundred Pistols, here has been three English Ladies walking up
before us


How can you tell Sir?


By being in France.


-- What a Devil can he mean.


I have often in France observed in Gardens, when the Company used to walk
after a small shower of Rain, the impressions of the French Ladies feet, I have
seen so much boon mean in their footsteps, That the King of France's Matre de
Dance, could not have found fault with any one tread amongst them all. In this
walk I find the toes of English Ladies ready to tread one upon another


I must confess Sir, so nice an observation as this* Belongs only to a person
of great breeding


O -- rare Wench.


Madam I esteem my self very happy in this hour wherein I have opportunity to
present my passion to you in a French garb, that I may not look like dull
English love


Sir, I shall endeavor to requi^e it by receiving it after the French way.


O -- notable Wench -- come let us meet them,

Mr. Frenchlove, you are met very opportunely,

We designed to have your company to night at a Ball,

Which I now desire of you.


I shall not fail to kiss your Ladyships hands.


I hope you will favor us with your company too,


I shall wait upon your Ladyship -- Mr. Welbred, I hope you have not told my
Lady Wealthy


But I have, and these your friends,


We shall expect you both.


I see all Ladies desire your company.


I know not upon what score, but I must confess French-Englishmen are not
common, though none can command my heart, but your Illustrious eyes --


Boy what is a Clock.


What need you know Sir, you sit in your Chamber all day.


Pox on it how this Rogue, he knows my course of life to a Hair, -- why sirrah
would you have me go abroad


Yes Sir, I would have wait upon Ladies as other young Gentlemen do.


Why so, I would sirrah with all my heart, but thou know I am acquainted
with none; do thou know any, Arch


Yes Sir, I know one.


Who is it?


Why Sir, it is my Mother, she lives in a little Cellar yonder in Holborn.


Out -- you impudent (...).


Nay Sir; be not angry, I meant it for your Entertainment, that you might not
sit at home all day in your Lodging


Sirrah, don't you think I should speak to a^ Woman very well, if I were
acquainted with any


I cannot tell that, but ^'me sure you speak o^ 'em very largely, that is one
reason I would have you make my Mother a Visit, that I might hear you talk to
her, to know what manner of Discourse you would make use of, i^ there should
ever happen an accident of your getting acquaintance with any woman


Saucy boy* thy Mother is -- no Gentle woman.


Yes Sir, I have heard her say. she is by the Fathers side.


Why sirrah, you told me she was a Tradesman's daughter.


True Sir, most Tradesmen's Children are Gentlemen by the Fathers ^ide.


Go see who knocks at door.


Sir -- Mr. Welbred.


Wait on him in, and be sure sirrah remember your Cues, if you here me talking
of women


You Will raise my wages then.


Well, well, sirrah.


Sir, it is a wonder to find you in your Chamber.


'Troth Sir, I have been dispatching some Letters.


I see you have Sir, and every one of them directed to women.


Sir, what answer shall I give my Ladies Gentlewoman.


Sirrah, I shall cut out that Tongue of yours.


Nay Mr. Vain, be not angry with the boy, it is no secret, your great
acquaintance with women is known all over the Town. Sure no man did ever lie
before this Fellow, i will try how great a lie I can make him tell

As I was coming along the street, I met a Funeral, and they said 'twas a
maiden hearse


Alas poor heart, she was buried to night it seems.


Why Mr Vain, did you know her.


Yes Sir, the Doctors said they could not find what killed her, but Mr.
Welbred, betwixt you and I, 'twas grief


O Mr. Vain, I apprehend you, 'twas for love of you, I find.


I don't say, so Sir; but I must confess I had some expressions from her upon
her death bed, indeed the last words she said were Oh! Mr. Vain, Mr. Vain


And the last words I say of your Worship, are O Mr. Liar, Mr. Liar


Well Sir, I come to tell you that your Company to night at a ball is desired
by my Lady Wealthy, and other Ladies


I shall not fail Sir, unless some great business hinders me.


Your Servant Sir --


What a Devil made me say I would be at the ball, I have so belied all women,
that I dare no more come where they are, then a Rat would into a Room where
there is nothing but Cats


Sir, with your Worships favor, you are the greatest liar that ever was, for
you not only belly the Bodies of women* but their Souls too, the first word that
ever you heard of this woman that dyed was by Mr. Welbred


Sirrah hold your prating.


I am resolved to go serve Mr. Welbred, if you will not now raise my wages --
and tell the whole course of your life


Well sirrah i will give you twenty shillings a year more; this humor of mine
keeps me in awe of my own foot boy, and yet I cannot leave it


Truly Mr. Comely, I have ^ot heard of better natured men then you and Mr.
Welbred, for endeavoring to get your Mistrisses well married; but most
commonly you young men never think of those kindnesses ^ill you are weary of the
Faces: It seems you reserve Mr. Vain for your Mistress


Indeed Madam, I think we have pi^ch'd upon two as ^itting* Husbands for 'em as
can be, for they want wive^ wi^h wit, and the women Husbands with Money


I wonder Frenchlove and his Lady are not here yet, pray speak to the Music to
play --


Sir, you don't beat the time right.


How Is that, then it is damned English time you play --


Yes Sir, it is so.


Oh -- that is the justness of my ear, that only keeps French time.


Sir, French time and English time, and all one.


Hold your prating Fairie Fiddler.


Sir, Upon account I will play with any man in France*


I do intend to speak to the King to morrow in a business that shall be for
your advantages


We give you thanks Sir.


It is that ye may be allshipt away for France, and I shall give every one of
you a Letter of Recommendations to the King of France's Violins to entertain
you as their Servants, and so teach you the French way of play, and de'e hear
you Alderman Fiddler, don't you love Beef extremely


Yes Sir.


Leave eating on'^, you will never play a good Base else; you must all expect to
be dieted when you are in France, and Dine of cold Salle^s three times a week


Come Mr. Frenchlove, will you dance a Corant.


Withal my heart Madam, if these Fiddlers could play the right French time.


Let them try.


Madam, excuse me it is impossible to Dance to their playing.


This fool cannot Dance, and so puts it off.


What are you all mad good people, to have Music and no Dancing, why, how now
Mr. Frenchlove will not you let these Ladies see your rare Quality


Sir, it is impossible to Dance with the French Violins: Madam I shall beg the
favor of a song from your Ladyship


Mark Madam, how I will catch his French Judgment Now first I will sing you an
English song, and then a French one to have your opinion of both


Englishmen make songs of stormy works, as if they meant fighting -- not
loving, Madam, by your pardon bestow a French song upon us

What Excellent words, and Air French songs are made of


Sir, I admire your matchless Judgment in all things, and envy Mrs. Crafty, who
I hear has the pleasure of your Company from all other women, you show your
Judgment in placing your affection upon so deserving a Person as she is, for
Beauty and Breeding


Hark ye Comely, your Mrs. stays without to speak with you, so when the ball is
done i will wait upon the Ladies home, that you may stay


Come Ladies it is late, let us go, Gentlemen your Servant.


I was coming to you, welbred told me you were here.


I have but just time to tell you concerning the business of Mr. Vain, how my
sister has advised me in it; he is a fellow comes near no sort of Company, so
that I know not how to get acquainted with him, she bid me therefore write a
Letter to him full of modest admiration of his Person; I told her this would
make him smoke it, and think -- Impudence in a woman


No, no, he has advised you well, to any knowing man ^'would appear so, but to
such an Idiot as he, 'twill take as quick as tinder. Is the Letter gone


Yes, yes, and I expect him here, I writ him word I would be walking in the
Spring Garden


My life on it the design takes -- O yonder he comes, let us conceal our selves.


Pre^hee Jack look once more upon the superscription, I cannot believe it is to
me from a woman


Yes, yes Sir, it is for the Right Honorable Mr. Vain Esqui^.


Prithee read the Letter once again.

Sir look not upon the weakness of a woman with a despising eye, since '^is my
Affection to your Person and Parts causes this shameful confession of mind,
wherein I own I have a greater value for you than all mankind, blushing I set
my hand to this


Jack, between you and I, this Letter I fear may be only to bring me hither,
and so trepan me into a beating; for I have spoken so largely of all Women,
that I expect it one time or other

Now do I apprehend meeting some overgrown Hector that knows I am a Coward,
and then i am sure to have forty blows more from him than any other man

Therefore Jack have a nimble eye.


Sir, O, my Conscience yonder comes such a kind of man as your Worship was
speaking of, for his shirt hangs out at his wast, and his Collar is unbutton'd


It Is so, let us slip aside to avoid him.


By Jupiters great toe i will walk here these two hours, but i*ll catch this
slave, and if I light on him i will beat him after the new way that I and my
brother Kins man invented last night, which all old fashion beating is nothing
to


This is very hard, I am not only designed to be beaten here to night, but
after a new way to boot: Pox of all new fashions say I O Jack, what a fool was
I to think any woman really could write such a Letter to me


It Is the time he promised to be here, well the longer he stays away, the
longer will I be a swinging him


This fellow is finely resolved, there is no way but one Jack for me to escape;
all Hectors ever want money, therefore do thou go and offer him these five
pieces to be pacify


Sir, I suppose you know my Master.


I suppose you lie sirrah -- your master may be in Hell for ought I know.


'Twas well guest, so I am, if Hell be a place of Torment.


A'^ please you sir, are not you employed as being a stout man to beat a
Gentleman here this Evening


I boy -- it is your master then it seems.


Amongst friends, it is so sir.


I do intend to try if he be stockfish.


Nay pray sir, my Master has sent you five pounds to lay your ^ury, and
protests he loves you dearl


O -- I had forgot, your master's name is Mr -- Mr --


Mr. Vain an' please you sir.


I, I, the same, he is an honest Gentleman, if he be here boy tell him I am his
humble Servant


I Will bring him to you strait*


This was rare luck, to get five pieces to forbear beating of a man, who for
ought I know might have beat me: But now will I get more money out of my
unknown Customer


My Noble Friend, your Servant,


Damme sir -- upon what acquaintance, I know not one feature of your face, not
so much as your Nose


Sir, my boy was with you but now with five pieces I presented you with.


Five Devils sure, you have a countenance looks as if you would be run through.


Pardon me sir, I don't desire it -- but indeed I sent you five pieces to
forbear me


Well sir, you did, and to tell you truth, I never intended, nor was employed
to beat you; perhaps you over heard me talking of Cudgeling one, but 'twas not
you


Nay then Sir, give me my money again.


Hold there, by the mistake I find you are a fellow that both will, and deserve
to be beaten, so that if you don't give me five pounds more you shall have it
strait


To show you I don't value five pounds, here it is.


Now Sir, though this wont teach you Courage, yet it will reach you against
another time not be a Coward before you need, and so your money and I bid you
farewell


Now do you appear.


Was there ever such ill Luck as this Jack?


True Sir, but yonder I think comes as good, I believe the Lady that writ to
you


Now I am so daunted, that I fear it is a man in woman's clothes, prithee peep
Jack, and see if she has not a sword under her Coats, let us walk twice or
thrice by her, before I venture to speak to her


I am confident this is he, by the description Comely gave me of him, I must
use some means to make him speak to me; O -- it is he, O that I were no woman,
that I might take acquaintance with him


She means me Jack, now will I speak to her, Madam may I ask your name?


I do not use to tell it men, and yet I will to you, My name is Crafty?


The very sound does sanctify my ears. Know you this Letter Madam?


Would I could say I did not, for then this face would wear a thousand fewer
blushes then it does, however these Lines have betrayed my mind, Worthy Sir,
think it not amiss of me, '^is the first folly Love e're prompt'd me to


So far I am from such a thought, as I adore you, yet truly Madam '^is not the
first Letter by forty that I have received from women in this kind, though I
never esteemed any but yours, pray pull off that envious Mask, i^ clouds my
Heaven. So through thickest clouds, when Phoebus break's, his light appears
more glorious. May these eyes ever look upon me with Pity, and then I am blessed


Did not you hear a great noise in the Garden just now.


Yes Madam, one of these talking Hectors was prating very loud, and I met him,
he began to Huff me, not knowing who I was, but afterward he asked my name, and
that quieted him


I am very glad Sir, it came not to a quarrel, and now I must take my leave for
this time, desiring you to forget the letter I writ to you


Madam my heart must still remember you, and all things of you, before you go,
I crave admittance to wait upon your Ladyship at your Lodging, as often as my
love, to you, desires it


Sir after so great a show as I have made to you already of my kindness; 'twere
folly in me to deny it! Your Servant


Give me leave to wait on you to your Coach?


No Sir, 'twill not be convenient, there are Ladies in the Coach stay for me.


Farewell Transparent-Diamond.


Farewell thou Transparent-Fool.


O VVench the Plot has took rarely,


Beyond expectation!


Come let us away, and thank Fortune for what is past, and court her for what is
to come


As sure as can be this Gaming servant of mine has been at play, that I have
not seen him lately


Truly Madam, for all that humor of his, I believe he loves you very well.


Hark, some body knocks at the Chamber door?


It Is Mr. Welbred, Madam.


Stay you here till I call.


O Sir, I thought you had been lost?


No that I am not, but I have lost, that is worse.


O -- your money at play, I thought as much by my being honored now, with your
presence; why I have not seen you this seven years


I am glad you think so Widow, but I tell you 'twas not half an hour ago since
you saw me


Why, how so prithee?


'Twas but half an hour ago since I cleared my Pockets.


But you don't reckon, how long the time was since you had money.


No Faith, nor did I ever in my life; take it upon my word, a winning Gamester
can never reckon, those pleasant minutes. A Plague of all ill Luck, I lost
seven to four at least, half a dozen times to night! I Will make you understand
the severity of my fortune, it is so much a better chance than four, as I think
of my conscience I could lay thee upon it, against hundred pounds in Gold


I thank you for your Demonstration, sweet Sir, and I do verily believe were I
in your power, you would lose me at play too, in one week; therefore you and I
will keep at a distance

What your Foot-mans in mourning for your losses, and he is as impudent as his
Master, he comes into my Chamber without knocking


Mr. Welbred will you be married to day.


What Is the meaning of this?


He Is no Footman Madam, he is a Parson.


A Parson; what makes a here?


Truly I brought him along with me to marry us, if you are in the same mind as I
am


Now cannot I hold from laughing at thy Extravagant humor, thought I could find
in my heart to have you beat down stairs


Prithee Widow be not angry, by my lost Maidenhead, I love thee, a thing if I
had again, I would bestow it upon thee -- with a good will. I shall make an
excellent Husband, very kind and very often


Hark y'e, I command y'e begone, i will never see your face again else?


Nay then I Obey, come Parson, you and I must defer this business till another
time, and Widow give me leave to tell you, you stand in your own Light, and
have lost a fair opportunity of being well married


Stay Mr. Welbred, i will take your council, i will have you before you go.


Oh -- is your stomach come down.


So, then i will make ready my Book, and put on my Spectacles.


I suppose you know the Vow I have made?


Not I, what is it?


Why it is, that the Parson who marries us, shall have ten Pieces in Gold, if
you love me so well, you will not refuse to give him that


A very Pious Lady.


Parson you lie, she is a wicked woman, she knows I have not a Groat; well
Widow, if you will disburse the money, ^'le pay you again out of your first half
years Rent


Another time, Sir, but I will not stay you now, I shall keep you so long from the
groom Porters


O thou gilting woman;


Like to like, quoth the Devil to the Colli^r.


Come Parson let us march, she has made a Fool of me, and I have made a Fool of
thee


Unkind Mr. Welbred, you will go then, I shall sigh This two days, ha, ha, ha,

Hark ye, give the Porter warning when ever he comes next, not to let him till
he calls you, and then do refuse to let him see me, unless he can show you an
hundred pound in G^d an^ say, I gave you this order; I fain would break him of
this -- (...), because I love him


It shall be done Madam.


HEre, these things you must sell off for us to day, we will give you something
out on it for your pains Friend; And watch your coming out for fear you cozen us


O welcome, have you brought more things out of France*


Ouy Monsieur,


Methinks ye speak very melancholy;


Monsieur, the English air no agree with the Frenchman.


Mr. French, your Servant, what you are always buying the rare fashions of
France


Sir, are they not very fine?


O extreme!


Sir, it is impossible the hand of an English Tailor should have set on any on^
knot of the Garniture of these two suits


Now will I hold my life they were mad by an English Tailor.


Well, what must you have for these Clothes?


Mounsieur, 150. Pistols for the two suits and the Feathers;


Here, I have just such a sum in my Pockets.


Monsieur, serviteur tres humble.


Hei Lacquie, lay up these clothes.


O you have sold our Ware it seems, come, to the next Tavern and then we will have
our Money


Mr. Frenchlove your servant, I have brought a very worthy Gentleman to kiss
your hands, Mr. Vain


Gentlemen if you please let us dine together?


Agreed.


I know a Cooks shop has the best boiled and roast Beef of any in Town.


Sir, since you are a stranger to me, I only ask you what you mean, but were
you acquainted with me, I should take your greasy proporsion as an affront to
my pallat


Sir, I only meant by the consent of this Company to dine well together.


De' ye call dining well, to eat out of a French house -- an English Cook's
shop is Hell


Sir, I understand y^'e as little as you do Beef.


Why then, to interpret my meaning plainly, if ever you make me any such offer
again expect to hear from me the next morning


What, that you could not dine with me?


No sir, that I will fight with you.


I see you are excellent good Company Mr. Frenchlove by your ralling.


Per dein sir, I don't rally, neither shall you with my pallet.


Mr. Vain, don't pursue this Discourse, you are both Gallant men, and there may
be bloodshed; besider sir, this is a Gentleman that has writ an History of all
the best French Cooks that ever was, and will discourse more Leardnedly upon
this subject than any man in the world


In short sir, I can only tell you that I had once a Dispute with a certain
Person in this kind, who defended the English way of eating: whereupon I sent
him a challenge, as any man that has been in France would have done, we fought,
and I killed him, and where about (...) guess I hit him


I warrant you in the small guts.


I run him through his mistaken pallat, which made me think the hand of Justice
guided my sword


I like not this fellow's Conversation Gentlemen, I must borrow my self from
your Society, for I am to dine with a Lady in Lincoln's-Inn-fields


How Is that (...)? where abouts lives that Lady?


Lives, why? here -- in my breast.


Why then, give me leave to tell you she has but a stinking life on it, since
you are so great a Beef Eater; but to be more plain, where does she lodge


In one of the New Houses.


Diabol, I fear it is my Mistress, if it be, and this fellow stout, I am undone,
however I Will put on a Face Sir I have a Mistress liv's in the same Row, and
therefore along with me and show me this House; if it proves the same, one of
our shirts must be dyed with another color


Nay Gentlemen, we will not leave you to your selves in these distempers, we will
wait on you; Comely, this will be a pleasant scene of mirth, thou know the
two sisters live in this house, let us offer our selves to be their seconds


Agreed.

Mr. Vain, be pleased to let me be your second in this business; and thus much
I assure you, Frenchlove is a rank Coward


I am glad to hear it. Sir if he fights with me, I had rather he were as stout
as Hector

Mr. Frenchlove, let me serve you with my Sword, I Will secure you, Veins an
errant Coward


Sir, I shall be the ^orrier for it if he fights with me, but I would not for a
1000 Pistols he were otherwise


Come Mr. Vain, will you go?


I Am ready sir.


Mr. Welbred, you are Mr. Veins friend, and I am Mr. Frenchloves, then lead us
the way and we will follow


I wonder I have not seen my ala-mode Servant to day.


Nor I, my new sprung Mushroom sweetheart.


Sister if ever we get them for our Husbands, we will change every half hour for
diversion


Well, they have both very good Estates, and therefore very fine Gentlemen,
take heed we don't reckon our chiken before they are hatched


No, no, we are reckoning our Calves when we talk of them.


Thou art a mad wench.


Faith not so mad as they will be if they marry us* Come let us sit under th^se
trees, and talk of them and think of others


Now, sir, which is the house.


It Is that (...) against us.


The very house my Saint inhabits. Mr. Welbred, not that I care to know, but
are you sure Vain is not stout


I am upon my word.


Sir, your owning the house makes my blood boil within me, therefore without
farther examination pull off your Doublet* passion and love unbuttons mine and
throws it off


Mr. Comely, not that i would give two pence to know, but are you sure Frenchlove
is not stout


It Is, true, believe me.


The same causes that pulls off your Doublet, as quick shall pull off mine.


Gentlemen, what mean you by this delay in such a business, if you're at your
prayers, they are too long for this occasion


O Comely, we are ruined.


Why, what is the matter, will ye not fight?


Yes, but this Devil must be turned another way.


As how?


We two must fight against you Gentlemen; we can clear your mistakes by our own
misfortunes. They are two beautiful sisters, lives in that house, we have long
been hopeless Servants too; now our despairs are more increased by being
Rivaled by you two: Mr. Frenchlove you being the man that enjoy the affection
of my Mistress the eldest


And you Mr. Vain the man that has the heart of my Mistress the youngest:
Indeed a friend of ours told us these sad truths this morning, so Mr. Vain go
you to Mr. Frenchlove's side and then we are ready for you


By your pardon Gentlemen, no man shall be my second that commends an English
Cook* or that ever thought ^eef good meat


Sure yo^der are four men with their Double^ off, as if they were going to
fight


It Is, so, let us hasten to prevent them. Gentlemen, hold your hands.


Mr. Frenchlove, Heaven defend, are my eyes fall or is it you?


Bless me and Mr Vain, what means this dismal sight, French. Madam, there is no
hurt done; but truly I think here had if Mr. Vain had loved the French way of
eating


How so I pray sir?


Why, then he would been my second, for I have resolved no man ever should that
eats after the English way


A happy deliverance, but what is the quarrel?


Concerning your two fair selves, with these two Gentlemen.


Who, Mr. Welbred, and Mr. Comely? I wonder they can be so impudent to fight
for us, since we have always slighted them


Will you still continue your Cruelties, Ladies?


Will we live you should ask us.


O what a sad day is this*


Sure Mr. Comely you have known few better as to us.


Come let us be gone, we shall but hear our miseries repeated; we slighted
Lovers are only fit companions for our selves


To tell you truth Madam, the occasion that brought us hither into the field,
was a mistake betwixt this noble Gentleman and my self; for he was talking of
going to a Lady, whom he was a Servant to, living i

I demanded of him to show the house, which proving to be yours, and not
knowing you had a sister, Jealousy then en^am'd my love, immediately we drew,
and to it had gone, but that the other two Gentlemen cleared the mistake


Yes indeed, we were just running a til^ one at another.


No 'twas running tilt one from another.

Thanks be to Heaven that you are both safe now, and pray Gentlemen hereafter
avoid having any disputes with one another, ^wil make my sister and I unhappy,
since we have both concerns

And truly Mr. Vain, a (...) Mea^s, Clothes, Powders, Essences, and those kind
of things cast your cap at 'em, and never argue i^ with Mr. Frenchlove; for
he is an absolute Demonstrator in such cases


Madam, I am perfectly Mr. Frenchlove's humble servant, but I must confess I
don't love to hear boiled or roast Beef spoke against


I sir, but extreme wel-bred persons value it, but as the flesh of a Beast.


Sister we must stickle between these two Coxcombs, for they will be falling out
every day

Gentlemen be pleased to walk in, and share with us in an ill Dinner.


Well I find when ever my Pockets are emptiest of money, I am fullest of love,
therefore will I go make the other visit to my widow, and see if this windy
woman sit's in so cold a corner as she did when I left her


Is your Lady within?


I am not sure sir, but i will inform you strait, your patience a little sir.


This fellow knows not my humor, I am always very patient when I have no
money


Is your Lady within Mistress?


Yes sir.


I am glad on it --


Nay sir, whither so fa^?


What a question that is? why to your Lady:


Why Sir, you must not see her unless you can show (...) a hundred pieces in
Gold


How Is that?


Nay it is true Sir, she has given me such order.


Pish, pish;


Nay never pish, I am not in ^est;


I, but your Lady is I hope!


No but she is not.


Why then the Devil take her in earnest, and keep her till she is out of this
humor, and so farewell to ye both


Mr. Welbred, I hope you will pardon me, I am at Le umbre and am a great winner,
and then I never receive any visit from a losing Gamester


Tyranizing Widow, I hope thou wilt lose all back again, and ten times as much
more, mai'st thou never draw for a black Dice, but it may prove redder then a
Country wenches cheeks, may thou never take up a Card, but Traies and Sixes*
may thou pay as often as I did the other night, which was ten times together


I see you love me, Sir, by wishing me equal to your self.


Love thee, I wish thy body may be a widow these fourscore years, that thou
may curse the cause that made thee lose thy Maiden-^ I hope the King will
have a mark set upon the name of all widows for men to avoid them


Be not so passionate dear servant, f^aith me thinks thou art a (...) fellow at
this distance: I (...) (...) good looks so well, (...)


And is the (...) (...) as come this year, (...) tongued female, hold thy peace
and let me in, else will I (...) (...) Murder to be hanged, to make thee cry
for me


I like thy way of being revenged, therefore prithee about it (...).


Well take your pleasure, farewell and be hanged as you said you would.


LEt my Horses be brought ready to the door, for ^'le go out of Town this
Evening


Why, how now Comely, booted and spurred?


Marry am I*


For how long?


Why, for this seven years for ought I know, I am weary of this Town, and all
that is m't; as for women I am in love with none, nor never shall, I find I have
a pretty strong defense about my heart against that folly. O here comes the
Ladies very opportunely for me

To take my leave of them.


Mr. Comely your Servant -- what in a Riding Garb?


A dress fitting for a Country Journey Madam.


Why, can you ever leave this Town?


That I can truly Madam, within this hour.


I cannot believe it.


Were It not uncivil to get up a Horseback before you* I would convince you
strait; ^ay, I did think I should be wondered at by you all, as much as an Owl
is amongst Birds: Very like now if I were in love with any one of you three,
though I were on Horseback, a kind look might dismount me again; but I thank
fate I never had that perpetration of the heart; ye^ ^ Disease -- as malignant
and as catching as the Plague; and Reig^s as the Plague does altogether in
London: So that for my future health i will retire into the Country for Air, and
there Hunt and Hawk, Eat and sleep so sound, that I will never dream of a
woman, or any part about her -- This resolution of mine has made me turn Poet,
therefore before I go, you shall hear a Song called my farewell to London and
women, boy sing the Song


LAdies farewell, I must retire,
Though I your faces all admire;
And think you Heavens in your kinds,
Some for Beauties, some for Minds:
If I stay, and fall in Love,
One of these Heavens, Hell would prove.
Could I know one, and she not know it,
Perhaps I then might undergo it!
But if the least she guess my mind,
Straight in a Circle I Am confined;
By this I see who once does Dote,
Must ware a woman's Livery Coat.
Therefore this danger to prevent,
And still to keep my hearts content:
Into the Country I Will with speed,
With Hounds and Hawks my fancy feed!
Both safer pleasures to pursue,
Then staying to converse with you.
Now Mr. Comely, would I give the world (...) see yo^ foundly in Love after
this Farewell Song of yours to all Wom^* I have heard the healthiest persons
when once they fall into a ^ver, are most distempered


Lady, faith you will never see me so, perhaps you may hear when I am in the
Country, that I am in love with my Hounds if they run well, but as for falling
in love with Woman, when ^ver I do ^'le sell all my Estate, and purchase Bedlam
to have it to my self, for 'twill be a house fi^ for no other kind of Madmen


Come Madam, since the Gentleman's in such have, let us leave him, he will think we
are f^nd of his Company, and would stay him in Town


Mr. Comely, I wish you a good Journey.


Ladies, your most humble Servant.


You will go then it seems?


Yes indeed will I, and dear Welbred, fare thee well, and since you are in
Love, I wish thee good luck with thy Widow


I find then you have not heard of my last visit to her?


Why what is the matter?


I Will tell thee, when I came to the door, I was examined by her Gentlewoman,
who told me her Lady had given her orde^ not to let me in, unless I could show
an hundred pounds in Gold, I could sooner have raised the Devil, for he was in
my Pocket; so that I was forced to retreat; and as I was marching off, she
calls to me out of the window, and Jears me


Welbred, She shows thee this trick only because '^is thy humor never to make
her a Visit, when thou have any money: All the Town know she loves thee,
therefore prithee apply thy self close, and get her for thy Wife, she is a great
Fortune ^or a younger Brother. One thing more I have to say to thee before I
go* concerning the two Sisters whom we designed to get married ^o Mr.
Frenchlove and Mr. Vain: Make Vain believe the cause of my leaving London, is
his enjoying the affection of my Mrs. and use all means for the marrying the
two young women, and ad^u, and when thou art weary of the Town, come live with
me in the Country


Farewell dear Friend?


Now i will away, a country life Shall be my Mistress and my Wife.


Pray Gentleman, is not this the place where the King and the Queen do walk,

Thou art the first man Elsbeth and I have met with since we came to this huge
Town, that wear Boots like our Gentlemen in Wiltshire


And did you two come to Town only to see the King and Queen?


No, no, we come about this Maiden's Vather's Will.


And what is this maids name.


Wouse man, one would a thought thou had been a better Schollard then to have
asked her name before mine


Cry mercy friend, what is thy name.


Friend do call me, how can tell I Am thy friend before thou know my
name, I am called (...) by all the folk that know me in Wiltshire


Honest William then, what is this Damsels name?


Why her Cursen name is Elsba, her next name to that, I wous is Pretty.


By all the charms of Beauty, a name as fit for her, as if Nature had
Christened her, and were her God-mother as well as Mother


Pray Sir, is there but one King, and but one Queen at London?


No pretty Mrs. Pretty.


Hark William, he names my name twice in on breath*

Why Sir, then the King goes no finer dressed then another man, no^ the Queen
then another woman, else William i will swear by that thing you are to have of me
when we are married, we saw bove vorty, Kings and Queens to day


Well, i will carry William and you one day to see the King and Queen at Dinner.


Thank ye Sir.


But are you to be married?


Elsba and I are both for^worn else.


Methinks that troubles me; it is but a fancy sure.

When are you to be married?


To morrow God send's fair weather.


My heart's disturbed to hear it, what can it mean, that I should find disorder
in my breast because this Country wench is to be married: I needs must ask
again

To morrow is the day you have set then?


Prithee, if thou will not believe, come to St. Brides and thou shall see the
Parson join our hands


The very hearing of it repeated makes me feel something, I know not what,
methinks more then a usual heat is now within me

Is it not very hot to day?


'Vous Elsba. And I have reason to say so, for we have walked all about London
to day; we don't intend to leave one fine sight unseen: We were at a place
where a huge rough thing (a shame take 'em) had like to have bit Elsba by the
Leg, and then the beast had utterly spoiled her new stockings which I bought
her at our last Fair


Prithee let us see what color they are off


That thou shall, if thy eyes don't hinder thee.


'Twas a beast indeed that could have bit that leg.


Why -- how now Will. will you offer to show my leg at London, have ye not
heard there is more danger in showing a maids leg at London then in the country


No indeed Elsba there is not, as long as I have thy leg in my hand.


Sure I would handle those legs more gently, what would I give now to be that
Clown; i will ask them where they lodge

By which means I may have opportunity to break my mind to her -- And where do
you two lodge whilst you are in Town, i am resolved to come and see you


Where thou shall be welcome -- we lie in the* Strand, at a House my Va^her uses
to lie at, next door to the (...) Heart When comes about Law Suits -- Come Elsba
thee and i will go home, I begin now to be hungar'd


Why do y'e use to sup thus early?


I warrant thee man Elsba and I go to bed before Candle tinding.


Sweet Mistress Pretty you will bid me welcome too I hope.


Yes indeed very kindly sir.


O -- that she would as kindly as I could wish.


Good Den t'y'e, come Elsba.


I William.


Sir 'twill be too late for your Worship to go out of Town to Night.


I think so too, set up my Horses, what sudden fate has changed my mind! I
feel my heart so restless now as if it n'ere knew rest, sure i am in love; yet
how I should find that who never was before, a man that is sick of a Disease he
never had, knows not what it is till the Physician proves it, yet i am
acquainted with my new distemper, as if I had lingered in it this twelve
months: how finely shall I be laughed at now if the cause of my staying in
Town be once discovered, I that have taken the liberty all my life time to Jeer
at peoples being in love


BElieve me honest Gripe, I Would have this hundred pounds in Gold but just to
show my La. Wealthies Gentlewoman


Sir, you have had so ill a run at play, and I have lent you so much already,
i am resolved not to part with af^rthing more


I tell thee Gripe I will not borrow it, i will hold it in my hand but half a
minute, and thou shall have it again


What good can this do you?


Good? -- Why 'twill be the absolute losing of my widow if thou dos't not do
it, i will only show the Gold at the door, then i will slip it into thyhand again


Well Sir, if this be all, here is the money for yo^, but (...) hold you by the
tip of the Coat to be se^ure of my money (...) yo^ enter


Is your Lady within?


Yes, Sir.


Why look ye then, I am come to see her, my Pockets are full of Gold, here is a
hundred of u'm


I Will call my Lady immediately.


Come sir, my money now you have done showing it*


What will not you let me keep it in my Pockets till I come out again.


No, no, no sir.


Mr. Welbred, I find Miracles are not ceased altogether, by your making me a
visit when your Pockets are full


Madam, I wonder you could ever have such thought of me.


I do y'e wrong I warrant ye.


In that behalf Madam, you wrong my heart, that loves you equally in all
Conditions


That is to say, you care not a pin for me at any time* Prithee, what is thy
love Welbred


It Is your fair self.


By my troth i am sorry to (...) it* for then I am nothing.


Nay widow, why so (...) (...) that values you above his life?


I believe you do at any time you have lost your money, for then you are weary of
living; No, Gentleman, if a winning hand can be my Rival, a losing hand shall
be yours


But why so sharp widow* ^ow I have convinced you that i am not of this humor.


Convince me for once, sure you think I am ^very fond loving Lady* perhaps if
you keep at this rate for a whole twelve month -- a year after that I may tell
you my mind


Why will not you marry me to day?


Why should you think i will hang my self to morrow?


Nay prithee be more mild, faith I love thee truly and nobly, end fooling and
be kind to me


No, no, to be kind to you, is to begin fooling.


Well I Will hold my peace, a woman sometimes loves to be Courted with the Eyes,
and not with the Tongue, so that for this time i will convey my love to thee by
looks; but, hark ye, though you don't care for me, I hope you love me better
than another man


Yes, that I think I do.


I am glad to hear it, I have not lost my widow, and yet have kept my humor.


Madam your Servant, we came to wait on you, to know if you will take the Air.


VVithall my heart, the Evening is very sweet.


Me thinks we miss Mr. Comely's Company already.


Truly at the rate men go now adays, many of their Companies are well spared.


That Is for me again, particular concerns make women speak in General.


Bless me! I think the Devil we were talking of, is appeared.


It Is either Comely or his Ghost.


Nay, never start Ladies, you may approach, I am no Spirit.


Why, I thought you had been settled in the Country by this time.


I settled in the Country, why, who do you think I am? i will lay five pounds not
one of you here know me


We have very short memories the^, are you not Mr. Comely?


No marry am I not, I am no such body.


Why then, thou art the Devil in his likeness.


No, no, view me well, I have too tame a look to be the Devil, no Devil ever
had such a melancholy Eye; and to show you I am neither the Devil nor Mr.
Comely, I am a miserable thing, that scarce thinks the day long enoug to sigh
in; I suppose none of you ever knew Mr. Comely or the Devil guilty of this


What means this Riddle.


Ladies be pleased to pard^n the Intrusion of this Visit, since I am a stranger
to you all, and so your humble Servant


Nay, pray Sir stay, we like your company well, and would fain hear some more
of these Mysteries


Why pray what do you take me for?


A man Sir.


You Are deceived in that too, I Am none, I want the chief Intral a man should
have; Ladies have you a mind to laugh for an hour


Withal our hearts, if we had but a fitting subject.


Why then laugh at me.


By no means Sir, not at a stranger.


Come, come, you all know me well enough, and yet I tell you, I am plaguely
altered since you saw me last


Why what is the matter?


I am a Pox on it -- I am a Plague on it -- I am in Love,


In Love -- what Mr. Comely, in Love?


Nay, nay, nay, come begin the laugh, and let it not last above three hours,
that is all I ask

Well have you done?


No, not by a great deal.


I must have patience till you have.


Comely, do you remember the house you talked of purchasing if e're you fell in
love with a Woman, me thinks '^were time now you took possession of Bedlam


O that care's, taken by my short experience, I find a man is in Love and in
Bedlam both at one minute


But how had you the Confidence to come near us in that condition, you that
have despised our whole Sex


How unreasonable a thing is that, to ask a man why he does any thing after
being in Love


Don't you expect to be laughed at, more then another man?


And have not you all laughed enough yet?


Enough? why we shall laugh at thee this Twelve Months, every day, but prithee
where is the face has done thee this mischief


Nay, '^is no London Female, she is a thing that never saw Cheese-cake, Tart, or
Syllibub, at the Lodge in Hide-Park orat th


I warrant it is some mimping Country Gentlewoman.


No, it is a Country Farmer's daughter.


Bless me, what an Arrow* Cupid has found out to wound thee with? Faith the
blind god has fitted thee


You must know I have not been a step out of Town; for immediately after I had
taken my leave of you, and was going to get on Horseback, I met with this
Creature and her Sweetheart a West country Clown, I had scarce exchanged six
words with her, but I found the constitution of my Eyes quite altered, which
heretofore had passed swiftly over all women's Faces, as hasty shadows over
Hills, but then so firmly fixed upon this Object, as if they never meant to
look another way


Is she so very Pretty?


Indeed she is, in spite of the strange dress she is in, which is a straw Hat,
a Quaif, a red Wastcoat, and a green Petticoat not long enough by two handfuls,
and yet me thought 'twas not at all two short, since 'twas the cause of showing
two such pretty Feet


Well Mr. Comely, we hope you will show us this rare Thing, and so we will leave you
in your Transe, but you must give us leave to point at you before we go


As you please Ladies.


Well, little did I ever think to have seen this day with you!


Nay, prithee leave this wondering now, and pity me.


Why it is no matter, the more you love the more pleasure you will have, since you
need not doubt success with such a kind of woman


Well, f^re thee well, I must go see her. It Is strange that Love should be a
welcome Guest, That enters uninvited to the Breast


MOnsieur French love, well met.


I cannot say the like to you, Sir, since I Am told you have done a damned
stinking English trick


In what?


In finding fault with a pair of Tops I wore yesterday, and upon my Paro^, I
never had a pair sat better in my life, they were never so much as washed in
England yet, and I Am sure any person of Breeding must say they fate so well,
that my Leg looked in 'um not at all like an English Leg


Sir, all that I said of your Tops, was, that they made such a rushing noise as
you walked, that my Mistress could not hear one word of the Love I made to her


Sir, I cannot help that, for I shall justify my Tops in the noise they were
guilty of, since 'twas A-la-mode of ^rance, can you say '^was an English noise


I can say though your Tops were made in France, they made a noise in England.


But still Sir, 'twas a French noise?


But cannot a French noise hinder a man from hearing?


No certainly, that is demonstration; for look you Sir* a French noise is
agreeable to the air, and therefore not unagree^ble; and therefore not
prejudicial to the hearing (that is to say) to a person that has seen the
World; but Mr. Vain, I cannot much blame you for this Error, for to understand
French things thoroughly require seven years being in France, no English man
that does not absolutely abandon his dull English nature, can ever be a
competent Judge of the sitting of Tops, or the garniture of Clothes, or
mounting of Feathers, and all other things of this kind, that belong to the
judgment of a right French accomplish'^ person. So Sir, for this time I shall
pass over this English mistake of yours, considering withal, you are a servant
to the sister of my Mistress


Indeed I am a very Zealous Adorer of that Lady.


And l'me confident you are a person she values, but had it been your fortune to
have fallen in Love with her sister, you must have died hopeless, for nothing
ever could have gained her but a French Address; which I being Master of, made
me successful in her Esteem, she has told me no English love could ever have
reached her heart: at times when I have been expressing my French Passion to
her, upon my Parol my Clothes, Garnitures, Feathers and Tops, have sat so that
you would have thought they had been sensible of my Amor


Here come the two Fair Sisters, they seem very merry.


Ladies your humble Servant, you laugh heartily.


I, and so will you when you know the business:


Pray what is it.


Here read this Letter.


And do you read this Mr. Vain.

Madam your kindness to Mr. Frenchlove distracts me, consider how long I have
been your Faithful dying Servant, therefore show me some pity for Heavens sake


My Letter's just the same.


What two Fools are these, to expect any favor from us, who have despised them
this Twelve Months* Mr. Frenchlove, you are not jealous of your Rival I
suppose


Madam, the favors I have reciev'd from you, forbids me, besides this Letter
bears no French style of Love, and therefore i am confident can take no
impression in your beauteous thoughts


Mr. Vain, you need not doubt me.


Madam the assurance I have had from you, and this Sword shall guard me from
any Rival


Are not these two pretty believing Fools sister?


O; They are the fitter to make husbands.


Hark Mr. Frenchlove, though I don't doubt my Mistrisses Constancy, yet I am
resolved to ask her to marry me with all speed, because so fair a woman as she
is, will have many Sui^ers. When do you intend to ask your Lady the question


At some agreeable time Sir, when the French fancy is most in her head.


Gentlemen you must excuse us, we have some business that requires have.


Shall we wait on you, Ladies?


No Sir, your pardon at this time if you please.


Madam your most humble Servant.


Madam your most devoted Creature.


Look ye Mr. Vain, though my Mrs. denied me waiting of her, yet 'twas a denial
with a French tone of a^voyce, so that it was agreeable


I did not understand it so at all.


Diabol Sir, you are Englishly mistaken then, therefore draw.


Bless me, what is the matter? what means this sudden heat 'twixt you two?


Madam, Mr. Vain does not understand that though you denied us waiting on you,
'twas with a French tone of a voice


Yes Mr. Vain, 'twas indeed.


Say you so, too Lady?


Yes truly 'twas!


Nay then i will not dispute it?


No pray Sir, nor never do things of this kind with Mr. Frenchlove, he is so
understanding in 'em; your servant gentlemen


Do You see Sir, how she leaves us, she walks away with a French step.


Nay Sir, that I cannot see.


Not see'^ mort deiu -- then draw your Sword.


Bless me, are you quarrelling again, what is the matter?


Madam he says now, you did not walk away with a French step.


O indeed Mr. Vain I did, for Heavens sake no more of this, 'twill keep my
sister and I i^ perpetual fears for both our concerns

Gentlemen, once more your Servant. Sister were there ever two such Coxcombs,
what boot betwixt your Fool and mine, but we must pray for their health now,
till we are married, and have our Joyntures settled; And then let the Bell tole
for them both as soon as time pleases, let him make as much have as he will


Well Sir, I suppose these are all willful mistakes, therefore I am not angry,
but am your humble Servant, I must leave you now, for I am going to view some
French things newly come over


The Devil Sir, why are you kept in awe by this Frenchlove? why did you not
draw to justify your Opinion


Jack, thou talk like a Fool, this Frenchified fellow fences Plaguely,
they will put a Thrust in quart or in the twinkling of an eye


Sir, if you will give me leave, next time he draws, i will have one English Pass at
his French body


Mr. Vain your Servant, i am glad I have met you, will you go see a Play this
afternoon


Troth Sir no, 'twill not be convenient for me.


Why Sir?


I shall meet so many Women there of my acquaintance, and if I speak to one
more then another, there will be exceptions taken.; I was ^'other day at a Play
and there was a Lady (who shall be nameless) sounded away upon the sudden, all
the company guest it was at a Duel upon the Stage, but Sir (let it go ^o
farther) it was at my whispering with another woman; and to tell you true, I am
going to see this Lady now, for she has kept her Bed with the conceit on it ever
since


And will she be reconci^'d to you again, do you y'e think?


Upon her own Pe^il if she (...), (...) too great ^ Libertine to be tied to one
woman. I Would give this hand, I could less^ my acquaintance with 'em


Sir, unless you will raise my wages ten shillings more this quarter, I will
immediately discover to Mr. Welbred, this honorable Lie you have told


Well Sirrah hold your peace, I will.


What Mr. Vain, I shall not have your company the^?


No Sir, I crave your pardon this time, your

Devoted servant.


Farewell to thee and all thylyes, certainly this fellow has robbed the Devil of
his whole Treasure; so that the Devil has not one lie left for himself. Now to
my Widow if I can but find h^ in a good humor, I shall get her Consent this
time

Oh here comes my Scriv'ner.

Whom I appointed to meet me here with an hundred pounds to show again at the
door, else I shall not be let in, have ye brought the hundred Pieces


Yes Sir.


Give u'm me.


You Will restore u'm unto my hand before you enter?


Yes, yes, as I did before.

Is your Lady within?


Yes Sir.


Look ye i am come again to see her with a 100 pieces in my pocket.


Now Sir my money.


Well, well, here it is.


Ha! what have I spied! he gives the Gold to that fellow? am confident it is
some Scrivener he has hired to send him a 100 pieces only to show, and the
fellow will not trust him out of his* sight, but comes always with him, have I
found you

Sir I don't know certainly if my Lady be within, but i will go see and bring you
word immediately


Madam it is so ^'le assure you,


Let me alone, I warrant you i will fit him; O Mr. Welbred, now I begin to think
you love me indeed, since you continue visiting me with your pockets full


Alas Madam, 'twas ever a great mistake in you to believe winning or losing
could either decrease or increase my love to you


But I used never to see you when you had a winning hand.


You may believe now that was never the reason, younger Brothers have
oftentimes troublesome business, and that might be the cause


Well i will believe you, go call my Cousen hither, and bring some Cards; Mr.
Welbred we will go to two piece Le umbre for an hour or two, i am sure I please
you in that motion


Madam, you shall ever please me; but at this time I had rather she had asked me
to have gone to the Devil, for I have not one farthing of money to sit down
with: how to come off now I know not, I fancy I look like a

Ass already.


Come, come Cousen you will make one at Le umbre.


With all my heart Madam.


O -- I cannot fetch by breath for fear of my approaching shame, head help me
out now, or else would thou were off


Come Mr. Welbred take your seat.


Faith Madam I have a foolish fancy now, i am sure you will laugh at it.


Why, what is it?


I Am resolved not to play unless you will lend me forty pieces of your Gold.


Fie, what a senseless conceit is this, when you have a hundred in your pockets?


Nay I will not touch a Card unless you do.


Nay prithee leave fooling, here the first Spade deals.


Nay, nay, no, no, not I, S'life I had almost forgot, I must run away a
Gentleman stays at the Fleece Tavern to pay me a hundred pounds I won of him
last night


Hold, hold, you shall not go, i will tell you a thing will stay you, to show you
how well I love you; I have a Chaplain of my own in the house, I will marry you
strait before my Cousen


Troth this is nobly done, what does this woman mean?

I begin to think she suspects I have no money, but how she should come to know
it I cannot imagine, dear widow i will step to my Lodging and make my self a
little finer, for i am resolved I will not be married in these Clothes


Nay, you fhan't go for that, it is all one as long as I like you in u'm.


O my heart aches damnably, I find by her willingness to marry, she has
discovered me: O that I were out of the room


Come Mr. Welbred, don't you be so liberal now, and give my Chaplain fifty
pieces of Gold for marrying of us, but as I told you before ten pieces you must
give him

Come Sir, you must join our hands, I am resolved to take this Gentleman for
better for worse


Now had I as lieve see the Devil as that black Parson. (...)


Mr. Welbred you shall give him your ten pieces before hand.


Faith i will go put on other Clothes first.


No, no, i will take you in these; come why don't you produce your money?


I must go home and smug my self up a little, and then i am for you widow,
Heart, Body and Soul --


Gentleman, I have found you out, though you thought to hove cozened me; you
have not two pence in your pocket, and come to see me, a Scrivener has lent you
a hundred pieces to show at the door, but would not trust you to come into the
house with u'm, shall I fetch you a Glass to see how like an Ass you look; no,
no Sir, the way lies there, you may go now as soon as you please, and put on
other Clothes, though not to marry me in


Provoking widow hold that biting ^ongue, and Parson get you up to your
Closet, and pray heartily for your Lady she will be damned else for promising a
man marriage and never intend it


Something 'twas indeed you would not play at Le umbre unless you had forty
pieces of my money -- O my dear cunning Servant


I Will be gone, for should I stay, that very Clock of thine would make me set
fire on thy house about thy ears


O! Gentleman -- you had brains enough, but you wanted wit to make this cunning


SUre this pretty Creature cannot love her Clown so well as me, if once I can
but find a time to talk with her: I Will to her Lodging, yonder she is I think
without her sweet heart too, fair one where wander ye

What makes you weep?


A lack a day Sir, I have lost William, I have not seen him this four hours,
and he told me when he went out he would go but just to the May Pole in the
Strand to see if it were as tall as ours upon our Green in the Country; many a
dance has William led me about our Maypole, therefore i would be loath to lose him
now


But what think you of losing William and finding me your sweet heart instead
of him


No a vous Sir, my heart has gone pit a pat for William, and no man else this
many a day


Are you sure you can never love me?


Not as long as my sweet William lives, and if he were dead I think I should
never sing Song again Milking my Vathers Cows. Pray Sir, was never any body
lost in London


Yes marry, some are drowned.


My William said he would never come upon the huge Sea that runs by the Kings
Majesty's window


How equally her Innocence and Beauty charms me

Fairest Creature!


I di^own the name Sir.


Then you wrong Nature that has made you so.


Nature, whose that I pray, for I would willingly injure no body?


Nature thy Mother pretty one, thy partial mother, that to thy Face has given
thee all her stock of Beauty


Indeed she is none of my Mother, I left her in the Country. My love is heathen
Greek to this fair Innocen


Well Mistress Pretty, when William comes will you give us both a hearing, let
him speak his love, and i will speak mine, and then see which you like best


With all my heart Sir, but William will be too hard for you, he is a Parsons
man at that wous, this heart can tell

O here he comes.

O William, where have you been all this while?


Been Elsba? where I wished thee twenty times, such a sight I think was never
seen by any body but me, and such as have seen't before. O Elsba, I saw two
huge rough hai^'d things led by the Nose, with two strings, and a huge Bull
like ours in the Country, with a brave Garland about his Head, and an Horse,
and the least Gentleman upon him that ever I saw in my life, and brave Bagpipes
play before u'm. I warrant thee I followed them close every street, till thick
little Gentleman a Horseback rode into his own House, then I was fain to leave
them


It Is Bear-baiting day, and he has met with the Bull, and the Bears, and the
Jack an Apes a Horseback; it is a very hard case this Clown must be my Rival


William, Mr. Comely desires that he may speak his love to me, and you speak
yours, to see which I like best; I think William if you could remember those
things you said to me at first, before you knew I loved you


A wous I h'a them all down in a Book I warrant thee.


William do you begin.


Agreed Elsba, I do love thee, I find by the Comfashiousness of my heart, I
could suck thy Eyes out of thy head, I could eat thy lips though I were not an
hu^gard, I could lick thee all over as our Cow does her Calf. O Elsba, my heart
do Thunderclap my breast when I think of thee, a wou's methinks sometimes
though I never am angered with thee, I could tear the clothes off thy back,
Smock and all, my heart does leap and ^aper when I do see this leg and thy
Coats ^uck't up as thou come home from Milking Vathers Kine


I think Mr. Comely this very speech of Williams has spoiled you.


Come fair Soul.


Nay, if thou have a mind to speak, speak of her body.


If nothing I can say can warm thy cold heart with pity, I am most miserable;
that I do love thee, my Eyes do speak


He Is out at first dash Elsba, that cannot be, there is no Tongue in the eyes.


Oh if that beauteous frame of thine were in my Custody i would guard it safe as
Angels do the Holy, nothing should e're approach it but my love, and that so
gently too, as when I touched thee, it should be as Nurses handle Limbs of
Infants; i would never Kiss thee but with Lips per^um'd with purer love, and gaze
on thee with maiden eyes that n're kn^w love before, no sigh from me should
e're come near thy heart, but it shall be as chaste a present, as if an Infants
brea^h had sent it, i would sit and wish away the night, because her darkness
would conceal thy beauty, and thank the day for bringing light again for me to
gaze on thee with wishing eyes, thou should be my Saint, and I would pray to
thee


Hark Elsba, the man's a Papist.


Sir, you had best spare your pains, I told you William would give you the go
by; if he had used no other talk to me then these, he would gone without me


Come Elsba le^'s go home, good den to ye Sir.


What is my fault that Heaven thus has punished me, to make me love a Creature
wholly ignorant of a noble passion, I might as well have told my talk to a
Marble Statue and have found relief as soon


Why, how now Friend, why so melancholy? what f^r being i^ love with a wench
you may have when you will


Thou art mistaken, there is as much impossibility in that, as in Nature, her
heart's so wholly in the Clown's possession, it is past the Art of any sweeter
^ound of Love to draw it thence


Prithee, in what kind art thou in Love with (...)? for a bit and away, or how?


Now if there be any purer Love on earth then ever was, I have it here for her.


Nay then, Lord have mercy upon thee, but hark ye now, hear a little of my
misery, my widow has quite* dis^arded me, ^me never to see her more


Why, how so?


She had given Order to her Gentlewoman every time I came, not to let me in
unless* I could show a hundred pounds in Gold; wherefore when I had lost all my
money, I was (...) to hire a Scrivener to let me have a hundred pieces to show
at her door* who went along with me, and before I entered I was fain to slip the
money into his hands again, for he would not trust me farther, which her
peeping Gentlewoman espied, and told her Lady


Well I Am sorry for thy ill luck, bu^ I have so much to do to pity my self,
that I cannot think of thee; I Will go walk in some melancholy place, for when I
cannot see her, I would see nothing else. farewell


And i will to my widow once more.

S'life here she is.


The Devil, how came I to meet thee, avoid Satan, avoid.


Stay thou cruel ^eet widow, or I Will send a Bullet, after you, shall spoil
your Race


Murder, murder, murder.


Stand still then and I will not kill you.


Well, what have you to say?


Do you believe I Love you?


No indeed don't ^.


As you hope to be sa^ed?


Hark ye, if I were given to swear as thou a^ when thou have lost all thy
money, I would now make use of all those Oaths to swear thou do not care a
pin for* me, nor I for thee

Why, my poor losing Gamester, how could thou have the Confidence ever to
look me in the face again after your last Visit


Well to show you I love you of all things in the world, I Will Pistol my self
strait, if you will not ma^y me


Pish, I Will be hanged then.


Do you dare bid me kill my self three times together?


Yes, do I.


Come begin and try.


Stay, is the Pistol charged and primd? now VV^lbred if you love me kill
yourself


Well, there is once.


Because* I Would have you make haste Welbred, if you love me kill yourself.


There Is twice, S'life i am afraid she will play the fool and bid me the third
time, she has been damned quick in the two first


Well now my departing Servant settle your Countenance with a dying kind of
look, and then i will pronounce thy last Sentence, i am pleased to think how
prittily thou wilt look in a winding sheet, i will have thee decently buried, and
thy Epitaph shall b

Here lies a Games^er that will play no more,
Guess at the reason made him give it ^'re.
Now are you ready?


Why, then present


Well said pretty Captain.


And now give -- you long for the next word now.?


Try.


Come you know I will not be guilty of Murder, that makes you so courageous.


Nay, stay, stay, i will kill my self yet, if you will not promise to marry me,
speak quickly


Prithee let us throw up cross and pile then whether it shall be a match or no.


Not I, i will trust to no chance now.


Come, most at a throw at Dice, that you will like i'^e sure.


No, no, absolutely promise me to marry me to morrow morning.


Well if it must be so, I will.


Upon your Reputation?


Upon my Reputation come to my House, and we will be married where your Friend
Comely shall be my Father, and give me to thee, for i am loath to do such a
foolish thing my self


You shall never repent this Noble Act, for what I want in Fortune, i will make
up in Love


I n^'re considered, we will exchange, you shall have one for the other.


I Will love you truly and ever.

Adieu till to morrow.

Time be my Friend, and swiftly bring that hour.


SWeet Mistress Pretty.


It Is the flowers in my boso^, Sir, not I.


If you can love me, all the fine Ladies you have seen at London shall not have
gayer Clothes then you, you shall wear holland smocks li^'d with Lace of 40 ^.
a ya^d, Gold Petticoats and Wastcoats, Diamonds in your Ears, Pearls about your
neck, Bracelets of Rubies about your hands, Silk Stockings on your legs, and
Gold and Silver Shoes on your feet


O woeful! William would not know me in all this bravery, but Sir if you would
give me all these things and Roastmeat twice aday into the bargain, I could not
have the Conscience to take my heart from William, he and I are going just now,
if you will be my Father and give me, i will thank you


I Would rather give my self to Beasts to be devoured*

Farewell hard-hearted pretty Creature, I cannot but love her too for being
constant to her Clown


Come Elsba, I believe the Parson stays, I have brought thy Ring, '^is beaten
Silver i will sure thee, and because '^is at London where things are dearer then
in the Country, I do intend to give the Parson as much as our Landlords eldest
Son gave when he was married, which was three and a Groat; so that this money
will ajus^ do it* here is two thirteen p^nce half penny pieces, three Groats, nd
a single penny


Madam you will pardon me, that I did not provide a French Parson to marry us, but
upon my Parol there was not one in London


What, you two come hand in hand, as if you two couple were going to be married
as well as Elsb^ and I


Make way English Clown.


Wo^s, but we will not; first come, first served, ^o Elsba and I will go before.


IN short, let the best of all Varieties that can be had be got for Dinner.


They shall Mada^.


Co^n, I believe you little thought ever to have seen me married to Mr. Welbred.


Pardon me Madam, I ever believed it would be a Math^, i am confident you will be
happy in him for all his youthful gaming trick^


Welcome Sir, I have chose you to be my Father, to give me to your Friend Mr.
Welbred this Morning


I shall willingly serve your Ladyship, and do him that Honor.

Is he here?


No, which I wonder at, for it is past his hour, I have invited Mr. Frenchlove,
and Mr. Vain, who are married this morning, you have promised the thing you
love will be here for us to see


Madam, my Master presents his Service to you with this Letter.

Dear Widow excuse me for an hour, for I am now at play, and am a great
winner, and the Persons whom I am at play with have five hundred pound more in
their Pockets, therefore it is not prudence to give over, where so much ready
money is to be won, I hope I shall make a Richer Husband to thee then I thought

Thine for Ever.


Was there ever the like?


What Is the matter Madam, I hope Mr. Welbred's come to no mischance?


Mischance, would he had broke his neck.


Bless me, what is the matter?


There, read this Letter.

This vile Fellow has vexed me so, I could curse him all day long, if I could
invent Curses bad enough, he is laid an open shame upon me before all my Friends
and Kindred; they must needs think by this, I am so fond of him, that I would
have forced this Marriage on him, would he were bed rid, and bound to lie all
days of his life upon a Bed stufft with Dice instead of Feathers, and that he
might dream all night long of throwing on it; i am resolved to hire as many Link
Boys as shall set him on fire with their Links, now can you blame me


Indeed I Am very much amazed at him.


Pray come all up with me to my Chamber and help me to Curse him.


Was there ever such luck, to be 500 l. a winner, and now have never a Groat
left? and have lost my widow into bargain, so I am shut out, I find no more
entrance here, then I had at a Back-gammon all this night, i will call at the
window

Why, Widow, widow.


What rude voice is that?


It Is thy Servant VVelbred come to be married according to thy promise.


Away scritch Owl, away, how can thou show thy face again after all thy
Villainy


Show my face, what de think i will be married blindfold?


Married, thou shall be hanged as soon, my kitchen wench ^an't have thee.


No faith, I believe thou can not spare me pretty Rogue.


Oh Impudent fellow hold thy prating, for i will n'^re see thy face more.


Then thy house shall be shut up, as if the Plague were in it, for i will besiege
it this week, and if e're it opens i will come in


Madam, be not so angry, shall I desire one thing of you? I know him to be a
Person of Great Worth, and one that loves you, and this is only a fault and
miscarriage of his youth, pray follow me down, and stand behind the door, you
shall trust your own eyes and ears, and not believe me, because you think I am
his partial Friend


Sir, I will, but cannot conceive to what end this is.


Come away with me, stay here no longer, you have quite lost the widow, she
calls you all the Rogues and Rascals and Cowards in the world, and says the
meanest slightest things of you, that she will have you beaten by Porters;
therefore e'ne come along with me, it is but time lost to stay, never think of
recovering of her


No, no, i will stay here till I starve before I Will stir, I know I have committed
a great fault, and if she does hate me I deserve it justly; but as I did ever
love her truly, so I do now, and so I will do whilst I have breath, though she
slight me never so much


Fie Welbred, this Resolution is folly now, since i am sure thou art the only
thing of mankind, she hates most, and as' have been thy Friend ever, so will I
show it now when thou have most need of me


In what?


I have a Cousen that has twenty thousand pounds to her portion, and she is
wholly at my disposal, she is handsome into bargain, her shall thou have for thy
wife; therefore come along with me, and never stand here for an impossibility


Noble Friend I thank ye, but could I have a more beauteous woman that Nature
ever yet made, and had she the Indies to her portion, she should not be my
wife; nothing but my widow now or a Grave i am resolved


Nay widow, come out and take him for ever and a day, if he spoke all his life
time he could say no more; come come take him by the hand, Thou ^ast him by the
heart already


My dear widow -- and shall we bring both ends together at last.


It seems Fortune will have it so.

We Madam I need not tell you now I Love you, you heard me say so when I
thought you did not


Well I believe you.

Welcome Ladies and Gentlemen, God give you all Joy.


Mr. Comely, here is a Country wench and a Clown at the door would speak with you.


Madam, will you suffer them to come in, and you shall see the thing I fell in
Love with, and the kind of Beast that is my Rival


Mr. Comely, William and I are both bold to take leave of you, we are going
home, the Wagon stays for us


Well Sir, i will leave laughing at you, and say I cannot blame you for being
smitten with that face it is so very pretty, I warrant she can Dance well, she
treads so nimbly with her feet, -- ask her


Can you Dance?


Yes Sir, our Town Jigg.


Fie, fie, this is English, Madam pray do you Dance a little, and show the
difference of the French Movement. Diabol, you Dance like an Englishwoman too


Sir, you may see how well I Love you, since only to gain you for my Husband,
I have hitherto affected the Garb and Fashion of Frenchwomen, though contrary
to my Nature. But now I am your perfect English Loving wife


How am I cozened?


Sir, one word with you -- you owe me 500 l. for Ware which you thought had
been French, because 'twas sold to you by the hand of this French Tailor;
therefore pay me or i will tell it before all this Company


Peace, peace, come for your money to morrow morning to my Chamber Diabol, sure
this damned England has infected my eyes


Hark ye Mr. Frenchlove, I believe you and I are whisk't with a couple of
Wives, for Mr. Welbred, and Mr. Comely pretended to be in love with them, and
the Devil a bit there is any such thing; besides, i am told they have been both
Mistrisses to Mr. Comely, and Mr. Welbred, and that they are of very mean
Quality


Pray Sir, no more of these English Informations, they are not agreeable to my
ear


Mrs. Pretty, though you cannot love me, i will give a hundred pound a year for
your Life


I thank you Sir, and i will assure you i will love you best next to William as
long as I live


Madam farewell, Heavens send you many a happy day with my Friend Welbred, i am
glad I was the Author of Reconciling you to him


Sir, I cannot give you many thanks now, but hereafter if Experience tells me
my Husband be worth it, i will be out of your Debt


Dear widow, doubt it not, i will throw away my Life when ever it appears a
thing unsensible to you; and to show you i will a void those things that have made
me so often hazard the loss of that kindness, i will never touch Card or Dice
again


De hear Lady, i will carry you into France next week, I see you will make a direct
English Wife else


Hark ye Master, take my advice, and return with your Bride: For by what I
hear, you are wiv'd to the purpose


You say well Jack.


Now will I go Travel, and try if the Air of another Country can Cure me of
the Disease I have caught in my own: Hereafter if any man shall tell me he can
never be in Love, i will not believe hi

For by my self I find,

Whilst there is a Woman no man knows his mind.



