THE FIRST PART OF Cicilia and Clorinda, OR, Love in Arms. A TRAGI-COMEDY, The
Scene LOMBARDY

Written in TURIN BY THOMAS KILLIGREW.

DEDICATED TO THE Lady ANNE VILLIERS COUNTESS OF MORTON.

LONDON: Printed by J. M. for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the sign of the Blew Anchor, in the lower Walk of the New-Exchange. 1663

HAve you heard the news, Turnus?


No, Sir, only a buzzing of something from the Army, and that diversely
reported, has the Praetor Letters


Yes, and Otho writes of a Victory gained that day against Amadeo, and that
they are still in chase of those Mountainers


And is Amadeo become an enemy worth Romes joy when she overcomes him?


It Is not the Soldier, but the Hunts-man that is showed in this Victory, they
have at last caught the Boar, his Sister is in the toil too; the Virago that
has so long made Otho a Soldier, for it is certain he loves Clorinda; but why,
unless it be for loving him, I know not; the great reason why most men love
their dogs; they say they will treat at Susa


Then there is more then we see in it; remember, Sir, Amadeo was your Rival,
and believed by most that know the Court, the chief cause of Cicilia's aversion
to your Highness; therefore I wish he may rather fall by the disease of his
Family, (a Roman sword) then come to dispute his Title here, for though he fled
the Court when he was a prisoner upon the death of his Brother, which was slain
in the Battle of Susa; yet most believe Cicilia knew of his departure


Hah, and this may be worth our thoughts; for I am certain Lucius, who is now
my Rival, is said to have made war against Amadeo, not Savoy. -- (See the
Praetor) now we shall know the news, for his vanity cannot conceal it


Mine are from the place, and mention a victory complete, and that they are
still in chase; the Princess Clorinda too is with her Brother; and Otho writes
that he believes this will be the last stroke they will be able to strike for
their Country; it is now seven years since that handful of men have stopped the
Roman fortune, at the price of five generous Princes, whose blood has been
dearly sold to the Roman swords


Otho writes, that he never saw more beauty, nor more courage then the
excellent Clorinda showed in the Battle, still fighting by her Brothers side;
and he hopes to gain them without blood* for they are now shut into the
streights of Susa, and the Cattle possessed by the Roman party; and I confess my
soul longs to see her whose fame and virtue, though an enemy, has at this
distance won my Brothers heart


Amadeo will then be fit for a second liberty, Madam; which I believe your
Highness will again consent that he may have


Prince Amadeo will be a Prince in chains, his heart is made of royal metal;
and gold will be gold still, what poor mean use soever employed in; and Lead
will be Lead though in a Crown


Yet he brake his word, and ran away (even with Cicilia he brake his word) and
ran from what he loved; nay, some say, from what loved him


But he fought afterward, and by this loss has got more honor then some men
win by victories: To the Roman fate a gallant man may lose, and yet keep more
honor then some are born to; her Stars have set her so far above the world,
that she stamps even virtues; and they bear a price as she bids them be
current; and I doubt not, but Prince Amadeo will find that Rome honors him
more for being a brave enemy, then if he had proved a tame temporizing friend,
which has neither virtue enough to dispute, nor love enough to revere her
power; and I confess, of all the services the Prince did to win esteem from me,
I loved him more for running from me when his honor called him, then if he had
staid, and pined at my feet; Prince Amadeo went then to make himself fit for
any gallant woman's love; and Prince Orante staid till he was fit for none


You have reason, Madam; he that will not be revenged ought not to be esteemed;
he that will suffer injuries deserves them; a Doctrine Orante may learn in
time, could he leave to love; and these remedies may work that miracle


You are too harsh; his mind, we know, is full of envy and pride; and when
those meet with courage and despised love, it may beget a danger your power nor
mine cannot resist; let him vent his malice, his words hurt no body


it is my honor and duty that he strikes at, and he has a thousand times
accused me of contriving the Prince Amadeo's escape; I confess he told me he
would go, and would have taken his leave of me; but I thought my self obliged
neither to betray a Father, or a Friend; and therefore I would not hinder him,
by betraying his trust; nor be so guilty as to countenance the fact by giving
him leave to visit me; and for his discourse, I told him it should pass as a
thing I neither believed nor counseled (and Amadeo had honor enough to know
how to choose with honor) this said, I left him, and he fled; for which I value
him, 'twas done like a Prince, whose first business is honor


I confess I ever loved him, and though I took it unkindly that he went away;
yet being a prisoner of war, and no word engaged, we ought to have kept him
better; and I believe, now, that if his love had not been more his guard, then
his guards were, he had been gone sooner


Manlius gives great honor to the Prince, and he is full of pity and
admiration of his Sister; he says, they fought beyond the belief of men, only
to avoid the being led in triumph; but his Letter mentions no such certainty of
a victory; he rather apprehends Prince Amadeo has some design in his retiring
to those streights; for their flight was rather a retreat then a flight; and
that he was against the pursuing of them into the streights; and your Highness
knows Manlius is a Soldier of so much practice that his fears may find faith;
he had the Van in the Battle, and lies now next the enemy


His Letters to me speak doubtfully of this days business, they being desperate
men forced beyond a hope of safety; and such as experience has taught us to
know, they will sell themselves at as dear a rate as any enemy the Roman yet
ever purchased with their swords; and where they now lie, our horse can do no
service


There is no disputing of this business; but diligently see those provisions
sent which Otho desires; and lest Manlius his fears be true, Cleon, command the
second and third Legion be this night ready to march; and when they are at the
Tower upon the Poe, there let them expect Orders from Otho; by which means we
may secure our friends, if there be any danger; which must be so much the more
desperate as it is unlooked for; within we will resolve further


What strange trouble's this? is not Manlius Brother to Lucius? am I displeased
that the world believes him a gallant and a knowing Soldier, young in years,
old in experience, and high in fame; one whom his generous brother dotes upon,
one that all the world esteems a person of honor, stained only with craft and
a little sullen roughness in his nature, having still been bred in Camps, and
nursed in war; but he is Lucius his Brother, and that heals all


How ill a character has the gentle Cicilia received of the best of men, except
his Brother! then Manlius there is nothing more gallant, nothing softer nor
humbler then his nature; famous for war and peace; and though his rough mind
want love to polish it, that the world may see how clear a virtue rules his
heart; yet I am confident when your Highness shall see him, Manlius will
produce some excellencies that will be new and strange, though in the Brother
of Lucius


At last, Calis, I have found thy heart, blush not, it is Manlius which so often
in a third person thou have accused, praised and lamented; O Calis, could
thou hide from me thy love, that still told thee all the secrets of my heart;
have I lived with Calis as if I would condemn her for loving Manlius? is that a
crime in her, and virtue in me to love his Brother? is Manlius unworthy? why
else does Calis blush to own her friendship


No, Madam; neither of these was the cause of my silence, which I shall now no
further observe, though a curiosity to know my fate made me conceal it till
now; for they are sad stars that wait upon my love, blood and death threatening
all the friendships that I make


Fie, Calis, shall dreams fright thee from loving virtue, or fear of ills make
thee act ills? Manlius is a man my heart is so well acquainted with by public
fame that though yet I never saw him, I could at first sight, methinks, desire
all fair and reasonable things from him, for he is friend to Otho, Brother to
Lucius, and loved by Calis; and if I live to see him, I will so chide his
frozen heart, shame shall make him kind and civil, though not a Lover


If your Highness will become concerned in my fortune, I should no longer doubt
my fate; those eyes have ever been successful; and when your Highness will
plead for me, who can deny that has honor? since we see the worst men, and
worst natures have stooped to your power. See, Madam, where comes a miraculous
Orante. See if he be not returned; retire, Madam, and avoid the visit


No, I have yet the justice on my side; and let Orante do as many unhandsome
things as his ill nature can prompt him to, I shall do nothing unworthy my
self; it is his guilt must make my ill usage justice; else to punish him and use
him ill, is not fair; while he is faulty I can with honor despise him; and
while I use him like a Prince (which I will do, and not encourage his love
neither) if he then fail in what a Prince should return, the world will condemn
him, and excuse me. His person is not his crime, he made it not; and if his
mind had been good, I could with honor enough have listened to his passion; but
his soul is as crooked as his body, and that is an imperfection that honor
cannot be reconciled to; I confess, Custom has made his importunities less
troublesome then they were before; Especially when I consider, how much more
affliction his Love must be to himself, in being the Lover, while despised,
then to me that am beloved; for while I endure the hearing of it he has the
Torment of suffering those pains he would describe, whose cure is desperate;
for he knows my heart is vowed to Lucius, whose return he dreads; And I am
confident he would kill him, if he durst Anger me; for, amongst all his crimes,
Coward is none


Speak softly, Madam.


Madam, such is Orantes Fate, that even Injuries from your Highness cannot
divert his Love, nor all the Harshness in your words, this morning, make me
omit the seeing my Enemy, when any pretense can give me the Occasion; There are
second Letters arrived, Madam, from the Army; Does your Highness know the
contents? their news has dul'd the Court


No, my Lord, not any thing: what is the report?


They say, the Praetor frowned; and it is reported, the Army, and all the
Officers, are engaged within the streights of Susa, and their condition most
desperate; They have writ for present aid; The third and fourth Legion are
marched, and the Praetor follows with the rest of the Army


This Manlius feared, the gods guide my Brother; Calis, we have other deities
then Love to sacrifice too, though I hope that God will be propitious


Amen to that; But Love will still be as blind as Fortune; yet were it not for
Love, I could force Lucius his fortune, though I cannot flatter my own; for
though my Stars have designed my Person the Scorn of all the world, yet kinder
Nature has given me a heart that dares be revenged on all the World; And
although I cannot be as happy as I designed, yet I will make others as
miserable as I please; and when Love will not let me be a guest in Cicilia's
heart, Revenge shall be in Orantes; My rest is up, I will either have her
Friendship, or her Honor; Who fears not his own may laugh at the Tragedies of
others. Divine-form'd Lucius, with sounds of Flattery, may pierce her heart, by
the Eye and Ear; But if despised and despairing Orante, thus branded by Nature,
stab not as near her heart with his Dagger, as any smooth Courtier of them all,
let me die despised in Story too; that, for a little Beauty, sold my Honor,
and my Peace. When Lucius returns, I must dissemble my hatred to him; which is
as hard for me to do, as for him to believe it; yet I do not hate Lucius; I
could love the man, if Cicilia did not; Strange Madness! to hate him because
she Loves him; And because she loves him, not dare to strike him; Love, blind
love, why have thou chosen me for a scorned subject of thy power? Unreasonably
imposing on my Reason a Love for her that hates me, joining still with fortune,
both which have decreed neither Crown nor Love for Orante; Depose my soul to
some greater power, by taking my reason from it, and then I may be happy
amongst Beasts, though most miserable amongst men


STand, stand.


Give the word; stand, stand.


A little Patience, and then they are all our own. -- Why Amadeo; And now, if
you will follow me with minds prepared for all Fortunes, they shall, at last,
find us an Enemy not to be despised; and either we will become their Triumph,
or they Ours


YEt stand, As you are Romans, follow Manlius; See where Old Marius his Silver
Eagle lies; Born in seven Consulates before him; If there be never a Roman
dares second me to fetch it off, Let Amadeo bear it to Susa, while you submit
your necks under the Savoyard yoke; Are you all dead, all stabbed with one
Calamity? Why did you shake your spears in the morning, and call for a Signal
to the Battle? Now you see, how low and foolish it is at any time to despise an
Enemy; Yesterday you were all noise, and full of revilings; Now a Pannick fear
possesses you: If you had Conquered yesterday, you had robbed your selves of
Triumph, for your vanity left nothing fit to be rewarded; and now you are
overcome, how your wounds will blush with shame; What dishonor must your
General sustain, when he sees himself a Prisoner to the enemy! he despised --
See the General of the Horse too, shall he see you deliver the Roman Eagles


No more, Manlius; I see a Roman anger in their looks, and this Affront has
given an Edge to their Swords; Let us go, and make good this pass, and we may
regain the day; for Otho, and the second Legion are drawn to the mouth of the
Streights to meet with Cleon and the fourth Legion; The Praetor too is upon the
March himself


I can bear any thing but this dejection upon a Loss; yet I know not why we
should at any time despise this Enemy; Remember my Opinion yesterday, when you
were all bent to pursue them to this place; Let us call to mind what they have
done with a handful of men; how, in Ten pitched Battle, they have stopped the
Roman Eagle in height of Conquest, and checked her power more then whole
Nations; Five Gallant Princes have defended their Freedom with their blood; and
this, the last of that Great Race, whose virtue we have proved in Peace and
War; And I confess, but in kindness to Lucius, whose Rival I know he is,
nothing should have engaged me to have drawn my sword against such virtue which
even accuses the Gods for arming against him


Dear Manlius, Brother in my mind as well as Nature, how I admire thee for this
honest plainness? But we are now engaged, and the Roman Honor is at stake;
it is Rome, and her Battles, we bleed in; and who draws a sword against her must
be Our Enemy; Else, by my Honor, though it be my Rival, I would hazard my life
to save him, the Princess has given so noble a Character of him


Let us find the General, and join with me in proposing a Treaty, while there
are some to show mercy to


Yesterday your words would have come as well-come as Victory to him, for I
know his heart loves Clorinda; But now, it is neither Honorable nor safe to
propose it; you know they are a Resolute Enemy, and must not be sought for till
they are beaten; if we treat, They will believe we feared they might overcome
us; And Otho must not treat with the Roman Enemies in Arms; When they
acknowledge her Power, then it is time to show a Roman clemency; till then, all
Acts of War are Roman too. -- See


All Discourse is tedious, and unseasonable now.


Sir, We were proposing of a Treaty.


It Is out of time; We must not give Our Honors for Lucius. -- The Legions will
not be here, as we expected; 'twill be night ere they can arrive, and We must
be resolved, with such Cards as fate has dealt us, to play this Game; Manlius,
you must give the Charge, if they advance


I shall obey your Order, Sir; for my kindness as well as duty obliges me to
your opinion; yet it is strange, that nice Ceremonies should make Prince Otho
thus design how to punish that Courage in an Enemy which all the gods have so
often rewarded in himself. This generous Prince has no crime but valor that
pleades against him; and shall Courage be a sin in him, and virtue in a Roman?
Come, Sir, I know you have too much Honor to dispute this with me; witness all
the wounds that I have felt; I look upon them as the copy of our first Rome;
Rome in her cradle, such a despicable handful of Men were we, such a contemned
virtue was Aeneas, so despised, so pressed by an insolent Monarch, such proud
Neighbors found Rome in her Infancy, and what had we then but this virtue to
defend us, what right to Rome? What force to defend or redeem us but such a
Courage? Nay, by what Title now do we hold an Empire over the world? But by
these swords, and minds resolved, such an Imperious Enemy wakned then our
sleeping virtues, and by forcing us often to dispute for her, at last won
Fortune to our side; with our swords we overcame the greatest difficulties; And
from a Colony of a few sea-beaten Fugitives, we are become Lords of the Earth;
and who knows the Fates of these Men? We have tried their virtues in ten years
War, to which now is added their despaires; Nor has our supplies and numerous
Armies, during this War, been oftener recruited then they have renewed their
virtue, still showing equal Courage to our best of Fortune


When I shall speak in favor of a Treaty, sure none that know my Interest will
doubt the Reason of it; And your Highness knows with what zeal I have pursued
this War; Yet I confess, Manlius his words have made me ashamed of that cause
that bred my hatred to him, whose Gallantry I shall always love next to
Honor: And I know the generous Otho could not be deaf to the reasons he has
given, but that he is angry with the affront which they have this morning
thrown upon his Fortune. I know his Heart is too noble else, to hate this
little great Enemy, amongst whom Clorinda fights; It Is true, 'twould vex a
winner to find one, and the last stake stoop his fortune


Come, Sir, win this Prince any way; his virtues in friendship will do more
Honor to Otho then a Conquest; Were I the General, I should be prouder to fold
such an Enemy in mine Arms, then to have led Syphax in chains


Now after a day won and lost, in which they have showed both Active and
Passive Valor, not dejected by the loss of yesterday, nor blown up with the
success of this day; They fell under our wounds, yet no groans filled our Ears;
at our feet their wounded truncks lay, and frowning breathed their great Souls
out


We call them barbarous; but what will the next age say, when they shall read
this story, but that the Romans feared Amadeo, and destroyed that eminent
virtue, because he might have become their Rival? But this is but discourse,
let us consider the place and our condition; If they know and take the
advantage, it may be our turns ere the Sun sets, to fill the Graves we talk of;
The place will serve for a Moral; have we not this day stumbled at the bodies
we slew yesterday, making those Triumphs then our dangers now? Your silence,
Sir, confesses the Reason we speak


O Lucius; Manlius. Friends, dear as my Eyes; why should you two; whom my Soul
loves, thus gall your friend? and now when he is beaten and dishonored, tell
him what a Conqueror should have done? Yesterday who mentioned a Peace? was
not victory then in all men's mouths? And now, when we are exposed to their
swords, and no way left to show we are Romans but by dying bravely, you would
have me treat; It Is poor and low for Otho, a grave is handsomer far; and they
will understand it Fear, not Clemency, should we propose it; Let us redeem this
fatal day, and then command me; but till we can give Laws, I am resolved to try
Fate to the last sword, and here. Let us part and embrace; whether we meet
again or no, we are Romans still; Manlius, our Honor and our Lives lie in thy
hands; And I am pleased to think the Roman Eagle has such a Protector; If they
force the pass, Lucius and my self will be ready to receive them


Come, Sir, he is a gallant Enemy, and to lose to such is no dishonor; It Is
their turn to day, 'twas ours yesterday, and may be again to morrow; Gamesters
that play fair must expect to lose sometimes, especially those that will
adventure at a Game so full of Fortune as a Soldiers trade; Be therefore, Sir,
resolved to make a safe retreat, and save our Honors; so to play this
aftergame will show a Soldier no less then a victory have would done


Sir, the Enemy advance apace, they have gained the the Hills; and Tullius
says, unless he be supplied he must quit the pass; Nor does the Enemy move
disorderly, as upon a success, but whole and in Bodies, as to execute something
long since designed.


Let your Forces second mine; for if we lose this pass, you must not think of a
retreat to Susa


Away then, each Man to his charge.


AWay, Lysander; follow where Fortune and Victory leads thee, and let these
Romans see we can be angry though not revenged; this is more then ever the
Romans could boast from us; It Is true, your swords have dug our Princes
Graves, yet they could never show one of Amadeos line or Family led in chains;
see, Clorinda, a Roman General in chains


It Is a noble sense of Honor, and Amadeo chides me handsomely; but if I had
any scruple in my Heart that tells me, Manlius, for fear of death, or want of
Courage became thy Prisoner, I would now beg thy sword to fall upon me, to let
thee see, how a Roman ought to free himself from such calamity; But I will live
and tell the world how much I honor that greatness of Mind, though in an
Enemy. For Manlius is a name, thy Father, Brothers, and thy self have often
proved in Battle; and I am sad to think, how fatal my sword has been to thy
Noble Family


Manlius is Brother to Lucius, Friend to Otho: O Amadeo, that I durst speak my
thoughts now, or that my Brother had but kindness enough to hear me speak,
before he chides my Passion


What would thou say? speak any thing but in praise of bloody Otho.


Bloody Otho?


Yes, bloody Otho; so bloody that his Love cannot tame his Heart; what else can
he hope from us? Why should Rome, which is the Mistress of all the world, hunt
poor Amadeo, and war against him, to make his people more miserable then
Nature has designed them; Here we live contented with our own, though the place
be so poor that curious Travelers are scarce tempted to pass through it, to
enjoy the fruitful vales of Lombardy; What can ye hope by making us your
slaves? Rich Mines we have none, Odours, Spices, and the Silkworm are
strangers here. These streams no shells with Orient Pearl afford, our sands
breed no strife-full Gold; These Rocks have veins, but far from the blew
Saphyr; The Ruby, Emrauld, nor the Diamond, grow not here. Innocence and Peace
of Mind is all the wealth we boast of: And our Freedom the only Jewel we
defend, which we will keep to the last Man; and the Romans shall always find
us strong enough to kill our selves, though we cannot destroy our Enemies


If my Love or Faith has any Credit with my Brother, let him take my Council;
Let a Virgins divining Soul prevail once, though my words seem now most
unreasonable to common sense. Now when he has power to kill, now when Conquest
is in his hand, when flight, dishonor, and certain death hangs over his Enemy,
it is, like Amadeo, now to sound a retreat; Now offer Peace, offer all but our
Honors and Freedom for it; This my Soul prompts me to say.


Call Lysander back, sound a Retreat, let Clorinda's Fate guide Amadeo, my
gentle Sister has refused no Fortune to follow me; and Heaven forbid I should
refuse to venture upon thy hand this last stake; only swear upon this sword,
by thy Fathers Soul, and by the chaste ashes of thy honored Mother, never to
be led in Triumph; swear this, and let what Fate displeased Heaven has decreed


I swear, and Heaven curse me if I break my vow. Sir, by the Power my Brother
has given me I release you; give him his sword, and conduct him through the
Army safe; Let all Prisoners be armed and released, and give command, that no
Man strike a blow more, nor hinder any Roman in his Retreat. Sir, you are a
Friend to Otho, and may find Faith when you speak; Pray tell him, a Virgin that
loves as much as he can hate, sent you to him, one that loves him next to her
Honor, equal to her Brother, and far above her self, would fain speak with
him; to try, if it be possible, to save one Root of a Royal Family, and die
without Infamy; that is all we ask, and here we shall expect your Answer


I accept the benefit, Madam, with a heart as pleased as if Fortune had given
me power to have played your part to day; And if I live, I Will serve you; or
being denied here I promose to return my self your prisoner; till when, live
most excellent among men, and noblest among women


It Is high Reason that she speaks; for if we overcome them, it is but
exasperating an enemy we cannot conquer; and this little victory can but
prolong our misery; we might if we pursued this advantage have killed some few
enemies; but in sparing of them we have gained many friends; for they are a
generous Nation, and have often been won, but were never conquered


To have killed them all would have tired us, though they had sat still; and
when we had done we had but showed our teeth


If Fate have designed the Romans masters of the world, we in vain dispute what
the earth has granted; and 'twill be honor enough for us to have it said we
thus long durst be their enemies; and if your Highness can thus compass a peace
with honor, it is my opinion, to embrace this opportunity 'twill give us some
reputation with them, to see we have taken this handsome way to offer a
friendship when we not only can defend our selves, but destroy them


Let us stand upon our defense only, till I give the word.


Your Highness Order shall be obeyed.


So shall my ever dear Sister, the virtuous Clorinda.


And when I am swayed by any interest, to propose ought against my Brothers
honor, let him and heaven scorn me


Sir, when I was prisoner to the Romans, I found civility from Manlius; and
though he be Brother to my Rival, he has too much honor to hate an enemy;
Clorinda says you are free, and she commands here; and now I owe the noble
Marius nothing, for young Amadeo was not worth a limb of gallant Manlius, great
in arms; and it is the greatest joy my life has seen, to be able this day to pay
that debt; and when you shall bless your eyes with a sight of the divine
Cicilia, throw at her feet the life and service of the unfortunate Amadeo


Lucius is Brother to Manlius; and you cannot be ignorant that love more then
hate, or Empire, has made him thus long an enemy to his Rival; the General
Lucius had odds enough in being Lucius, and needs not the advantage of an Army,
to dispute his fortune; the gentle Cicilia is a perfect Judge of Love and
honor; and would not be seduced to choose the least noble, and where Orante is
only Rival, it is no honor to overcome; therefore, for Lucius his honor make a
peace, and give Amadeo leave to try his fortune


I shall not only deliver this, but find some other Arguments, which Clorinda's
modesty will not let her name; and thus much I dare say, Lucius his hate, if he
be so poor as to hate a Rival, will not hinder this peace so much as Prince
Otho's love will advance it; and although my sullen nature was never yet a
Lover, yet he that can hate may love; and I that can see others love, though I
cannot love like them, yet I can tell what disease reigns; and I shall either
find the Prince of my mind, or return Manlius a prisoner, bound by the Reason
and Gallantry of Clorinda


All kind fates wait on Manlius; here we shall expect our dooms, with minds
prepared for all that peace or war can threaten


WHat means the enemy, they make a stand; and have sounded a retreat; haste
Lucius to the Pass, perhaps they see not their advantage; if we can gain the
Valley, we may defend our selves this night, and join with those Legions which
now are upon the march; poor Manlius, thy fate is sadder then all the rest


Pray, Sir, give me leave to charge again; if it be possible; let me fetch off
my Brother, his faith ought not to be abandoned, shall we see a Roman General
thus; forsaken in the hands of a barbarous Mountainer, and his body, for ought
we know, want his funeral Rites


How now, whence comes this rudeness? where are your Officers, under whose
command are you


Manlius's, and thus set free by warlike Clorinda, unspoil'd either of Arms or
Ensigns


Is Manlius safe too, what means this? my soul is full of wonder; see, Sir, my
dear Brother is returned.


The ever noble, always welcome Manlius; but how thus armed and safe, with
freedom inform us, dear Manlius


Sir, here I stand, the bounty of Clorinda; not only my self, but all of us owe
to that generous Maid our present safety; be pleased to know, we fell not into
their power by chance; 'twas long designed; nor are they ignorant of the least
advantage, and had pursued it but for the divine Clorinda, who prevailed with
Prince Amadeo, and stopped his fury in the heat of chase, and conjured him ere
he took the advantage of this day, to hear her speak; Now is a time, says she,
for Amadeo to show his virtue; now it is time to treat with honor; now when you
cannot only defend your self, but destroy the Foe; if ever you hope to make a
peace with this great enemy, neither rob nor disarm them; if they fight for
honor, and to command the world, they will not forgive a dishonor, nor forget
a benefit; what we have done this day, and all the wounds we have given to this
place, was for our honor and safety; but what we shall act further, if you
pursue them, will look like a desire of revenge or hatred; and make the world
believe if we could have conquered we would never have treated; then she turned
to me, and having received absolute power from her Brother; Manlius, says she,
is Brother to the noble Lucius, and friend to the most excellent of men,
Princely Otho; and Manlius has virtues which will weigh down the scale of
Amadeo. Thus when she had made me blush with praise of my self; with our Arms
and Honor she commanded we should in safety pass to pay the debt her Brother
owes Prince Otho; and when you see the General offer our friendship to him,
offer these few lives and swords we have left to serve him and the Roman
Eagles; offer all, but our honors, for a peace; and let it be such a one as we
may not blush to receive, nor the Romans despise us for accepting; and if we
cannot gain his friendship upon these terms, here you shall find us ready to
defend, with our ancient virtue, both our Fame and Country, with minds resolved
for what fates soever the Gods appoint us


Did I not tell you 'twas a gallant enemy? what is there to consider? why
should not your heart fly into the arms of this gallant Prince


Dear Lucius, draw up the Army, and stand upon your Guard, till we return; and
during the cessation be only ready to defend your selves; Come, Manlius, we
will find this gallant enemy; and if we can with honor grant what he desires,
thou shall find how welcome Manlius and his opinion is to his friend; send
Cleon with a Guard to attend us, during the Treaty


I shall.


THe Officer says, Manlius was received with much joy; and upon the arrival of
the Soldiers the General gave immediately Orders for a Cessation of Arms; and
it is Manlius desire that we expect him here, where Clorinda shall, at last, see
this fate of Savoy; how does her Arm, Lysander


Sir, the wound had taken cold before 'twas dressed.


This wound will heal, as we succeed; if I can cure them of my Country, these
are but slight; but if it must be war still, sadness will add one more to my
heart, that foresees I must part with my dear Brother


I hope, Clorinda, we are not now to set up our Rests; they have been long at
stake, we were born Princes, we have lived so, and must resolve to dye so; we
must all dye once, and Princes have no sepulcher more noble then a Battle, nor
Epitaph so honorable as a wound when it is received in his Countries cause.
There is no disease so Princely as to fall by the sword when he must dye;
sickness and old age take away from that Majesty that Reverence men pay us: who
can adore us as Gods on earth, when they see the Gout Cramp us, or a saucy ague
shake a Princes soul out? No, Clorinda, when Fate will call me to my Doom, let
me meet it in a pitched Battle, against a gallant enemy; then we fall like our
selves, and our Funerals are waited on with thousands of loyal Soldiers; those
that live to wither here till old age waste their souls, dye common deaths; and
go to heaven like private men, and pass unregarded like some melancholy Ghost


Sir, the Roman General appears.


How they gaze on each other?


There is greatness and gallantry in his looks. Good Gods, why should these men
be enemies


It Is proper for me to break this silence, and to show Clorinda my heart is not
ungrateful for the benefit I received; the General is here ready to receive
your propositions


What excellencies, what virtues must fill the minds of these Princes, when
their very looks speak great things? I never saw her steadily before, but
passing and charging; she robs her gallant Brother of my wonder, she lessens
his glory, which should be my admiration (were she away) she is chaste and
stout, courage of both sexes flows there; such a fellow in Arms who durst war
against? her eyes have gained a perfect victory over my heart; my youth and
fortunes first kindness shines in those divine lights


Sir, by Manlius we sent a message to great Otho; Clorinda's Prophetic soul
proposed it, our desires were few and short, being the sense of those minds
which never yet were false; we only ask to be used like friends to the Romans;
that we once dared to be enemies ought not to prejudice us, but rather show us
worthy the honor of a peace, which, with honor, is all we ask, and then
command us


Why should the Roman General be twice moved to accept us for friends? Rome has
enemies enough besides; she has many Tributaries, and many Slaves; Nations of
poor minds, worth no better fates; such as Rome got no honor amongst, for they
had none to lose, scarce worth a Triumph; methinks they should for variety
desire one friend, my Brother begs the place; you may love him too, and not be
jealous of his greatness; and well he may become their friend, and other men's
envy, whilst Rome takes a pride to make him so. Alas, Sir, we are no Carthage;
no Antiochus, no Philip treats now, that may be emulous with the Roman
Greatness. We only beg to possess, with honor, the Sepulchers of our Fathers,
in this little Province, and to hold, as friends to Rome, what is even lost in
the Map; and for your Friendship, take Our Faith, and Love; Other tribute
Amadeo cannot give you, he receives no other from his Subjects; It Is all his
wealth, that we love him, and he asks no more of us, and that We will pay to
you, Leave us our Honor, that We may be worth your Friendship, and then our
Swords are yours; But if you dishonor us you will despise us too, and we shall
hate you; This is all we have to say


Why are you silent, Sir? Is there room for thoughts in your great mind? Can
you be in doubt, whether you should receive those for friends, or no? They are
so few, it is a shame for us to War against them; they are so few, they are
only fit to be Friends; But when you consider their Gallantry, and Numerous
Excellencies their Courage too, how Infinite, 'twill be wisdom to gather this
rich seed into your Bosom; Romes Dominions are large, and lie fallow for want
of such virtues; Plant these brave minds amongst them, and bless the Empire.
There is a Virgin too, worth your highest thoughts; try to conquer her with
Love, and softness; such a Pallas in your lawful Bed would Steel your soul
against the world; and under her virtue, and your fortune, what Soldiers could
miscarry


Prithee peace, and learn to love, and then thou will cease to wonder at my
silence; Do thou think the first sight of the objects we love can so little
possess our souls, that there should be room for words; what has Manlius seen
in Otho, till this Minute, that could call him dull or vain; if not, sure
Clorinda's Eyes and Reason must beget both Amazement and wonder, and let not
the Excellent Clorinda, because I am silent, doubt her Power; for know, my
bus^e soul was full of surprising Joys, and unexpressible wonder; and my
narrow heart blushes still to think, how short my love and Fancy fell; when
they thought by Imagination to present the divine form and great mind of the
Excellent Clorinda; to express whose Excellence where shall we find Epithetes,
when a Lovers fancy could not comprehend it? O my Fate! can ye wonder, Madam,
at this dumbness and amazement in me, when I see my barbarous heart upbraided
by that scarf? that wound has shame belonging to it, which will stain my soul
for ever; and I could curse this profane and Sacrilegious hand for violating
that Temple where Honor, Love, and Beauty, with a perfect virtue, were
enshrined in those chaste Veins; till the profane Otho warred against Heaven
and Clorinda; at whose Feet behold the guilty ready to Clorinda


Do not despise me, Sir; for though Clorinda may lose her hopes, yet she will
keep her Honor; and then, though she be not worth your Friendship, yet she
ought to be above your scorn


Frown heaven, if I despise, or dissemble with the best of Women; and some
Curse, new and beyond Example, as his sin, strike Otho at your Feet, if my soul
have not a clear faith and Adoration for Clorinda; nor will I rise from this
place, till she believes and pardons me this crime, which thus, in shame and
Repentance, I have confessed


No more, Sir; 'Twas the first favor I ever received from Prince Otho; it is an
honor I shall ever be proud of; from this wound I gathered Courage, and began
to hope your Highness had some value for me; Whilst Prince Otho turned away in
Battle, whilst he received my Blows, and would not deign to strike again; he
called me Woman, and despised Clorinda, which made me both with Love and danger
hunt him till I had gained this Wound; then I began to hope, since he thought
me worthy of his Sword, when we were Enemies, if we live to see a Peace, I
might be worthy of his Friendship too; and if this Wound can make Prince Otho
kind, I am happy to have bled for the health and safety of my Country; and if
your Highness have kindness enough to wish it whole, Embrace my Brother; Then
you shall see, with what Pride I will kiss and wear this Scar


I embrace him, as I would my peace of mind, or Clorinda's Friendship, and at
her Feet throw my self and power; Here, Sir, ends all Acts of War betwixt us;
And if We dispute again, it shall be to overcome in kindness; Sir, I am here my
Fathers Lieutenant; Till he and Rome Sign and Confirm my Acts, They are only
kind intentions, which have a readiness to show how much my heart is vowed
Clorinda's; Though I believe the Senate will not dispute my Act; However, Sir,
your are safe from this War; Manlius, let all the Garrisons be drawn off, while
this Prince and People be received as Friends to the Senate; and see there be
no injury shown to the meanest person; but let all be treated like part of
those whom thy friend Loves and Honors; at Millain we shall expect you,
whither if your Highness please, we will repair, to stay my Fathers march;
whose kindness is, now, upon the way, to prevent that Danger our Alarm gave him
last Night


I shall wait upon you, Sir, and not despair, by your intercession, to obtain
the Pretors pardon for my uncivil departure last


Marius is too much a Roman to be displeased with a generous Act, though his
Enemy perform it to his prejudice; Your Highness needs not fear your well-come
where Marius commands


May your wishes find the Gods as propitious to you as you have been to us,
while we love and Sacrifice to Otho, the Noblest of the Romans


Otho is, in all things, Clorinda's Servant, and Prince Amadeo's Friend;
Manlius, you are sad


Not displeased with our happiness, I hope.


Heaven forbid; No, Gentle Clorinda, though I have been bred in Arms,
unacquainted with the Peace and softness of the Court, nor ever tasted this
Love you so greedily drink down, having never known nor sought other Honor
then the Sword gave; yet I find, it is not impossible for Manlius to learn to
love, if he had such a Lesson as Clorinda before him to imitate


War, Sir, has been your Mistress, and your Business still; and it is a Trade
that Princes learn with Honor; Swords are the Instruments, and with His the
Noble Manlius has Writ high things; There is no Beauty like an Army, in a
Soldiers Eyes; Victory is his Mistress; And passionately gallant Manlius has,
all his life, pursued her


Manlius has not yet seen any thing he thought beautiful, perhaps; but love
will have a share in his heart: Honor and Courage are but Forerunners of that
god, to prepare the Heart, when it shall bid Beauty and Virtue Well-come, which
makes me prophecy, I shall live to see Manlius, for all his roughness, a
passionate and a handsome lover


She is a Witch, by this light; It Is the Devil, or love, vexes me already.


If your Highness please We will retire, and give Manlius Opportunity to see
the Army march


We are here to receive and obey your Highness Orders.


The Noblest of Romans! I am not envious, nor proud, yet the Noblest,
methinks, is a Title should be bought at a higher rate then Otho has paid for
it. Ambition is a Soldiers Beauty, Honor his Mistress; and I will not give
place to any man when that is in dispute; What, a Pox, makes me thus
Quarrelsome; Thus on the sudden concerned in her Opinion; There is something
seems new and strange to my mind; it is troublesome, and yet it is pleasing, it is
a vexation I never felt before; Her words raise a storm, and her Eyes allay it
again; I never was concerned in a Woman's thoughts before; Methinks I could now
be strangely pleased to act something, that might please her; If this should be
love What would become of me? A peace and Love both together, You must get a
dark house for Manlius; They will make me fit for Hellebore; I will find Calis,
and tell her my pain, she has talked of Love, and loving me; I will find by
her, whether I am bewitched or no; My heart will not be idle, I perceive; We no
sooner are proposing of peace, but he is busying himself with Love. All brave
men I loved before; But never saw a Woman that could possess my thoughts; But
this has so much of the Soldier in her, I begin to fear; I would I could see
her spin; This storm has so disordered my mind, all things lie on heaps in my
heart; Love and Hate, Reason and Honor, lie shuffled together; 'twill cost an
Age, in thoughts, to Collect them, and place them as they were before this
fatal day, so full of care. O! That I could see what fruit this bitter root
can bear


O Calis, all my fears are ripe, and the doubts my soul labored with are now
delivered to the world, thou know my heart has tried Love, in all his
Passions, but never felt a Torment like a jealous mind


Whence this disorder? Why this fear? Is the Army Defeated?


No, no, Victory and Peace attends it; And with that Peace, All my miseries
flow in'; In short, Otho loves Clorinda's beauty, and Amadeos Gallantry; all
these several virtues make but a poison for Lucius


Be plain; Or else Expect no help in my Counsel.


Know then, 'twas all our opinions, That Otho should make a Peace with Amadeo;
which being done he now avowes his Love to Clorinda, whose heart has always
admired Prince Otho, and hither they are coming with speedy Marches, to renew
the Ancient kindness betwixt Cicilia and Amadeo; which sprung first, when he
was a Prisoner, more to Cicilia's Eyes then Marius his Guards; you know the
story: O Calis! had the Princess less virtue, or Beauty; Were fame silent in
her praise, or had the noble Amadeo been only born great, like wretched
Orante; had not heaven given him Honor equal to his Birth, I could then have
slept with a secure mind, seeing him love while she had despised; But his
virtues, Calis, make me fear a second spring will grow, whose Harvest cannot
but be fatal to Lucius. I conjure thee therefore, let my passion prevail above
thy Reason, that I may receive the Honor of speaking with the Princess, this
Evening, that my troubled soul may find some peace from her, to calm my Jealous
heart, whose doubts, and fears of my own worth, make me still Jealous I may
lose the Jewel of my Heart; Dear Calis knows, I never pretended to purchase
Cicilia; No such guilty vanity has stayn'd my Love; but, like an humble Beggar,
still offered all my Heart for Love; And if her gentle mind can forgive this
fear, which I can never lose, till she be mine, though a smile from her may
allay Lucius


Rise, Sir, Lucius is welcome as mine own wishes; Lucius, to me, in his faults,
even in this fear is well-come; and though I will not chide him, because his
Fear is Love, yet I will counsel his Jealousy, which, to this hour, I confess,
is not only pardonable, but ought to be rewarded; Which thus I do. Know
Lucius, Though Amadeo has Excellencies enough if 'twere possible to justify a
broken Faith; Yet it must not be where my friend is his Rival, Who has all that
is required to make a happy Friendship, if not stained with Jealousy. Be
therefore confident that I have Honor; And here must cease all the unhandsome
fears that tell your heart ought, but Lucius shall enjoy my Love; And now I
have said this, if Lucius shall again stain me with his Jealousy, I fear my
heart will not bear such an Injury; For none but a faulty heart can doubt the
Honor of his Mistress, when she has given her faith


Alas, Madam, would you have me hate Jealousy, whilst you Excuse it, and
reward it thus? 'twere Ingratitude; I ought rather to Sacrifice to that
weakness, since it has been so fortunate as to make me happier then all the
endeavors of my life besides


Justice, Sir, shall ever prevail, and that makes me confess your jealousy to
this hour was Innocent; for it tells me, Lucius was afraid to lose me; But if,
after this declaration, he shall doubt again, that doubt calls me false, and
tells all the world I am not worth his Friendship; Therefore, if you love me,
here you must begin to hate jealousy or I shall find as severe a Revenge to
punish that Injury, as I did a kindness, to reward this Alarm which Love gave
to Lucius his heart


Pray, Madam, spin this Thread no finer, lest it break.


I have done, the Praetor expects you, whither now I am going, and long to hear
the truth of this Business, which has so much surpised the Court


WHen we have paid our sacrifices to the Gods for this deliverance, not only
from a danger but from a war too, 'twill then become Otho to provide for the
entertainment of these Princes, like Friends and Allies to the people of Rome;
whose Honor is no less at stake now when they are Friends, then when they
declared themselves Enemies


I shall most gladly, Sir, receive this Commission; and I am so partial to mine
own Heart, that I am apt to believe Rome never got more Honor from the Triumph
over any Prince, then she will in the Friendship of those whose Virtues and
Persons call the gallant part of Mankind to protect them


Amadeo has more years in his face, else the same Man he was when he fled
unkindly from us; I confess, I never saw any stranger I had so much kind value
for before. There is something too so Clorinda, which I cannot but admire and
pity; and I would not, for my old Honors, this war had ended in the sword;
'twould have upbraided the Roman clemency; Cicilia, I observed, you were
disordered at the sight of them; you see Beauty nor Virtue are not confined to
the Roman Empire


Far from me be the vanity or guilt, to wish the Gods should confine their
Blessings; it is well if the Romans can preserve their own Honors, and nobler
far then to seek the ruin or destruction of it in others; I confess, I never
saw nor read of any persons more to be admired then these two Princes: And Rome
joins with me in their praise, since in all her pride of Empire she has
thought these worthy both of War and Peace; and now, after seven years dispute
she embraces them


Did your Highness never see them before? has there never been any League
betwixt your selves or Nations


Not any, Sir.


Always Enemies! What esteem had you of them?


Nor Friends nor Enemies; unthought of, they lived by us. Good Heards-men,
sullen, stout, hardy fellows, such as this his race have always been; who
because they know no better, seem to despise the valleys wealth, bravery and
luxury they are unacquainted with; For what should they be drunk with? Milk?
How exercise their gluttony? upon black bread and scorched flesh? For Clothes,
you see, they have as little variety as invention; a Sun-tan'd skin, with the
Fur inwards turned, with the season, is the Wardrobe of their great Shepherd


I find Orante has no great kindness for the Prince nor People; yet he cannot
deny the Princess Clorinda is a strange example of Virtue and Courage; she
fears no wounds not dangers


She will play at football, thresh, and hew woods, as well as her Brother;
Alas, Sir, it is not there as in Rome, and the Eastern World, where the Women
are soft, bred nice, and full of tender thoughts; Here is no difference betwixt
the Sexes, but that they esteem them less then Men: Their Cowes plow too, and
their Mares bear burdens, and their Women fight. No beast of that Country has
any privilege; and I wonder at nothing so much as the Roman Curiosity, that
has made War thus long against this waspes nest in a Rock. By all our Gods, we
never thought their Country worth asking for, we only banished Malefactors
thither; and they have chosen rather to return and die here, then live and
wither out their days in that nest of Winter. Cold, Poverty, and Ignorance,
are the only commodities, I know, their Country affords


Yes, they have something else; they have a breed of stout and handsome
Princes; Their Nation too have Loyalty, and Amadeo looks like a Prince among
his People, his Mind too is Princely; and though he live in a Cottage himself,
yet his Soul resides in a Palace; which is nobler far then to see Fortune
blindly give a Crown to a wretched Prince, who fills a Palace himself, while
his Soul lies in straw


You are Otho that say this, else you should know Orante understands it.


And it is to Orante I say it; who, I am certain, has guilt enough to know I
mean him; whose Envy cannot suffer the Virtues of a gallant Prince, and
faithful People, should be praised; Because he knows it is upbraiding of him,
who has neither Merit to win, nor Power to keep a Crown. Where were the Battles
fought that wonn those fruitful Valleys? What have we to triumph over in
Orante


No more, I say; the Prince is in our protection.


Let him talk on, Sir; he has Reason on his side; For Orante is both in Person
and Fortune fit for Otho's scorn: But if Cicilia's eyes had not more Magic in
them then his sword, I should ere this have found a way to be revenged


Otho raises storms, and I must allay them; All this will fall upon my head;
and, in serious earnest it is not well done to upbraid him with his Person or
Fortune; you will rub that tender part till he grow desperate; A thousand times
I have heard him say, it is yet in his power to kill a Prince, though he cannot
restore one; which dark saying he will never explain with other answer, then,
Am not I a Prince, may I not kill my self


Let him be just to others, I will be just to him; Why should his ill Nature
find excuse, and my truth be troublesome? Why should he lessen my Honor in
this War, by despising my Enemy, undervaluing, and detracting from the
nobleness of those Minds with whom we have made a Friendship


I confess you have reason to be angry, if the subject were worthy of it; but
being branded with the marks of a Malicious Nature and an ill Tongue, you ought
to despise his words; for how can you be handsomely angry with one you have
overcome already? To whom you may give Honor, but can hope none; And I know
Otho scorns such an easy secure War


Yet I am then like my Sister, who, whilst she condemns it, fights that battle,
and has again overcome a Brother, whose Heart and Reason has by a thousand
victories confessed her Power, and still shall remain the loving, though the
conquered Otho


When you see Lucius, let him know I would speak with him, and let us have no
more of this dispute; You know, he is a thing we cannot fear, let him pass by;
and since he has not Honor enough to kill himself, let him live


How now, Calis! sad!


So will Cicilia be, when she knows what I see.


Prithee what can there be of new that should make me sad?


Did you observe Lucius, when Amadeo spoke to you?


Not particularly.


I have so much Friendship for Lucius, as to fear there may be some trouble in
his Mind; some fears worth the remedy of his friends to cure betimes


His fears? it is not possible, sure, that Lucius should have fears now; if he
has, they will be more dangerous then any thing he apprehends; for if he fears
me after this mornings satisfaction, he has lost my Heart; for I shall despise
him that call me false. Love has but one path, but one safe way; he that would
walk in two may lose himself; and I have told Lucius he is that way; and
nothing but his Jealousy and Injustice can make Cicilia stray


See, Madam, a visit not to be avoided; would Amadeo were no more to be
suspected for Lucius sake


While Orante is civil, I must bear his visit; and his Love is less injurious
then Lucius his fears will be


If my return be troublesome, as my fears still tell me, unfortunate Orante is
even in his Love to Cicilia, who has no guilt but what she and Love are to
answer for; Behold I am come once again to offer, with humble thoughts, all the
service of my life at Cicilia's feet; Dot no despise me because your Brother
throws his Injuries upon me; it is your Highness protects him from Orante, who
fears nor loves any thing but Cicilia; for whose dear sake I have still born
the burden of my Miseries


Sir, I am not now to tell you why your Propositions come too late; Orante is
not ignorant of that Obligation Lucius has upon me; and to pursue me after that
knowledge is such an Injury, as if Orante does not repent and desist from, I
shall be bound in Honor to punish


To punish you have reason, Madam; your Brother teaches all the world how to
treat tame Orante


Your Highness is only sensible of those Injuries which are done to you, and
never consider how you force Men into Passion; would you have heard a third
person despise the Princes? I am confident you would not; why then should your
Highness in a full Court speak disdainfully and slightly of Clorinda, knowing
what Passion the Prince and she have for each other


I despise her not, nor ever consider her or her Brother so much as to beget my
Envy; I cannot admire them for lying in snow, and eating of black bread; they
live and eat as they were bred; better food would set their teeth on edge


Yet it is great Virtue to bear those difficulties, and suffer them rather then
lose their Honor; and will be admired by all generous Minds that shall read
their story


Not at all; no more then we admire our Horses for eating grass, it is their
Nature; nor is there more wonder nor pity due to what Clorinda acts or suffers,
then to a Tree for standing in the rain; and I would call one as soon into my
house as the other; they are all bred to it, it is their Countries Nature and
Custom; their Fathers did it before them, and their Children must do it after
them; it is Nature not Virtue you admire


If this be not Virtue, what will plead for an Admiration in your sense? What
do you believe worth Honor and Admiration


Their contrary; to have been born great, heir to the pride of Nature, Prince
of a Country the envious world, nay Rome her self, has looked upon with
covetous eyes to have possessed; That without trouble, fear, or danger, to have
had all the blessings that the Gods could send a Man; To give these, nay be
robbed of these, and not feel the theft, but willingly suffer to be thus
deposed from all his joys for Cicilia's sake. This if it be not worth her
admiration, it deserves her pity at least, since she is the cause of all this
misery; For her Beauty is the chain that binds me from taking Revenge for this
theft, for whose dear sake I have digested all these scorns and injuries; Nay,
I have brooked a Rival, a happy Rival too, because she loves him; but be not
too obstinate in this cruelty, urge not a heart too far that is full of love
and duty; your scorn may bow him till he breaks all bounds of Love and Honor,
as you have done of Charity; My form, I know, is despicable; but Love is beauty
still; Love can make me lovely, and scorn, gentle Maid, is as deformed as I am;
and such a poison it will even infect Cicilia's heart, and make her ugly, even
in Orante's eyes; Scorn will do more then Reason, Love, or Honor; 'twill beget
anger, in whose dark shades, in whose storms Love and Beauty will be blasted;
and then what succeeds, hate, dangerous hate, whose effect will be as full of
misery to Cicilia, as Love has been to me; who cannot hope will be angry, and
revenge still waits a despairing Lover; and who ever he be that is despised,
till he despise himself for loving so unfortunately, may when he will be
revenged, though not pleased; your Father conquered my Country, betrayed by
those I trusted; all, but Orante, Treason gave you; but I was reserved to give
a victory to Cicilia's eyes; but if she still delight to frown, know, I can and
will be free; but I have yet so much love, as to fear, for your Highness, what
issue your scorn and my revenge may have. When I have the honor to see you
next, and your Highness has considered what I have said, I shall hope my love
may beget an answer to bind me ever to your feet; your pardon, Madam, I will
retire


What do you study, Madam? is there any thing in this to be considered? haste
to the Praetor, let him and your Brother be acquainted with the dangers that he
threatens; he is no more to be trusted loose, my heart prophesies he will act
some desperate villainy, if you permit him to walk and converse among us


I have my fears too, but not for my self; Lucius and Otho are the objects of
his hate and envy, which makes me apprehend, for them; else for what concerns
me I despise him


WE will dispute this no more, Sir; pray give me leave that my faith and love
to the fair Clorinda take all ways it can to express it self; I held it a duty
in friendship, when I knew your noble heart had still retained his love to my
Sister, not to expect your solicitation to express my readiness to serve you;
and since we have gained my Fathers consent, doubt not the rest; for I know she
is too much a Daughter, and Sister, to refuse to meet our desires in Prince
Amadeo's love


'T was the opinion of many when my Brother was prisoner here, the Princess was
not displeased with his addresses; but absence and such a diligent Rival as
noble Lucius makes us fear a greater opposition then your kindness will
apprehend


That Lucius loves I doubt not, for Cicilia has beauty and virtue enough to win
an esteem from the severest minds; but certainly I am so much a friend to both,
they will take no resolution without my consent


Alas, Sir, how blind is kindness; and how unlike to a Lovers passion is that
which Nature owes, and pays betwixt Brother and Sister; had your Highness my
heart and my eyes, how visible would those Lovers appear? how many kind jealous
doubts would their looks, this day, have raised in your heart? know, Sir, I am
certain he pursued this late war more as my Rival, then your General; and how
much against his heart this peace was made, time will show; but when I consider
his fears told him the Princes Cicilia was at stake, I love and forgive him for
that hate; for she is cause enough to put the world in Arms, and worth the
trial of their fortune, till she declare whose she is; and then it is equal sin
and treason to oppose her desires, as it is now virtue and true honor to aspire
her friendship


And if Amadeo be the man designed for this blessing, The gods have largely
paid all our sufferings, in the friendship of two such Princes


I confess, my fears make me wish the Princess had first been moved on my
behalf; then the Pretors consent had completed all my wishes; the honor I
have had heretofore to practice her excellent mind makes me fear she should
believe me faulty in this Proposition; for though it be kindness in your
Highness, as a Brother, to move it to her Father; yet I that am a Lover know
the first sacrifice of Duty and Prayer are to be paid to the Mistrisse; else
she may believe I desire her friendship, but am loath to take the pains to win
her


Come, Sir, no more fears; shall we in peace know that pain we felt not in war?
or doubt a conquest over a Sister when honor pleads against her, will she deny
to follow this president; and by the example of Clorinda that has blessed me with
her friendship, refuse to make Amadeo happy? she cannot sure, unless she resove
to make me blush to death when I shall find how much I have loved, and how
little reason I had to value her kindness


If your Highness then will discover to her how far you are advanced (as
unknown to us) 'twill be a way to inform your self, and prepare her for the
love and service my Brother is ready to present


This morning I have designed to speak with her, that she may not have any
ground for her displeasure; I will only acquaint her with it, as my desire,
which before I would proceed in it, I took my Fathers opinion; according to her
answer, we will resolve; till when, your Highuess pardon


YOur Highness is sad. -- Pray heaven Lucius's fears be vain. --


I confess, my mind never had more business then at this hour; then now my
heart had never more use, nor ever was less capable, of counsel; diverse
interests plead within me, but honor shall still be my guide, and Lucius may
(if he be wise) still keep his power over this heart; yet his second fear has
made me so angry, that I begin my self to fear Amadeo


And what does that fear prompt you to?


To believe that Lucius and my self had kind stars that removed him hence, lest
such a gallant Rival might have disturbed our peace; for it is not easy,
without partiality, to decide such a dispute as their love must have bred in a
mind of honor


I do not wonder at Lucius his fears, since I find you doubt your own strength.


I do not say this from any guilty thoughts of mine, which should give Lucius
reason to be jealous; but as I apprehend the world may condemn me of my
injustice to Amadeo; for certainly, without partiality to himself, Lucius could
not pretend to that injustice which my kindness gave him; for my love to Lucius
cannot blind me so but that I shall always confess I ow Amadeo what I can never
pay; and though he nor the world shall ever know how much this debt troubles
me; yet he shall have all the satisfaction I can in honor give him


I confess, Madam, the character that Manlius gives this Prince is enough to
inflame the world


Manlius has his clouds too; and methinks, Calis should have remembered his
praise of Clorinda; had I been she, 'twould have concerned me more, Manlius is
one I never saw before; and though my mind were too busy, then, to make an
exact observation of him; yet, methought, there appeared none of that gayness
in his humor, none of that voluble tongue men speak of; By this sight of him,
Manlius is changed, or else the character I have heard of him was made by a
very ill observation


I shall hide my fears no longer from your Highness, but confess his coldness
since he returned; and that strict friendship he has made with Prince Amadeo
makes me believe he has some design on the fair Clorinda, which vain hope; when
I consider, her mind and his Rival, I cannot fear he should be master of his
wishes; yet the attempt will be enough to let me see I am past hopes of mine;
for I know him of a nature most violent in his passion, either of love or hate,
bred always a Soldier, and taught by success to know no opposition but what a
Soldier ought to remove; yet when your Highness sees him you may, by some
Questions, as by chance, inform your self of what I dare not mention


He is Brother to Lucius, and friend to Calis, which are obligations enough to
make me concerned in his fortune, and to justify such a curiosity; and if I
can deserve from him, Calis shall find a diligent friend; and he shall be very
crafty if he hide his passion from me; and if I perceive any name but Calis in
his heart, I will so chide him, so shame him to himself, he shall not dare to
pursue so injurious an act


But how will he brook this freedom, Madam, being so newly acquainted; I would
not for the world he should believe I set you on; for we have still made it our
business to hide our friendship, so much, that it is yet a secret to Lucius


That shows Manlius has not so open a nature as his Brother; for I am confident
Lucius has not a secret but Manlius knows it


Madam, the General and the Lord Cleon are within to wait on your Highness.


We will follow you; come Calis, a little patience will reconcile all; and
remember these thorns will grow where there are Roses; it is as natural as his
beauty, or his sweetness; and kind nature that gave us the Elixar of the Be,
gave him a sting to defend his Hive against Drones, but not to wound thee or me


Nay, Madam, I am so perfect a Lover; I find little things make me fear, and
less reason hope; yet it is as pleasant as strange, to observe in Loves war how
many fear, and how few despair


It Is most certain, Sir, I heard your Bando proclaimed; the people said 'twas
published upon a complaint the Princess made of a violence that you threatened;
three days you are limited to present your self


Then there is three days to be revenged in.


I was told too, from a good hand, that Prince Otho had gained the Pretors
consent for Amadeo to marry the Princess Cicilia, so to tie by a cross match an
alliance betwixt the two Families


And all this stir only to complete a curse for Orante; yet I have three days,
and this Dagger left; and if this hand hold his humor, and this Dagger keep
his point, I may spoil the Plot; my Lord, we must keep our friends and our
selves still in readiness, and in this disguise walk amongst them, for a day or
two; but this cursed person of mine that will lie hid in no disguise: how in
the Devils name shall we contrive to obscure it? this hill upon my back calls
all eyes to my vexation and my scorn


Like an old woman, stooping upon your staff, you may creep amongst them; and
in that disguise frequent the temples, where you are sure to find an
opportunity; and in these woods here you may abide amongst the old Hermits, and
mingle with those beggars that haunt Juno's Temple, while I prepare our design
in the City; and when it is time then be resolute; and let us strike home,
better dye at one blow then wither thus


How comes it they defer thus long the hunting of the Boar? Otho and Amadeo
were wont to delight in that chase; methinks Otho should long to see his
Virago, that cloven knight, come pricking over the Plains, clad in mighty
Petti-coats, Clorinda hight; that hateful issue of a fruitful enemy, how comes
she to change her savage mind for love


Love has made her change her tragic Buskin, and now she delights in the soft
steps of Comic love


Sure all the world changes its nature only to vex me.


Well, Sir, we must now leave to wonder or talk; and resolve speedily to take
our revenge upon them; your disguise shall this morning be with you; and if I
can learn any news you shall immediately have it


To what a straight am I forced by Love and Fortune! how have I armed all the
world against me! but Nature, unkind Nature was my original enemy, who has not
only set the world, but my self against my self; mine own eyes despise this
object, what wonder then if Cicilia hates it; yet I love Cicilia, and her mercy
is as due to my love as her scorn is to my person; but it is not my deformity
makes me despair, but Cicilia's love of another; that is it makes my blots so
visible, and my despair so high, that of all the passions man's heart is capable
to feel, revenge is only in my power; and that, if fate deny not, Orante will
command


YOur anger, Sister, is more unreasonable then your desires; and the worst way
you can take to satisfy a friend


When my heart tells me I have injured you, like a Sister that honors and
loves her Brother I shall humbly beg your pardon; but you must give me leave to
say, I am injured now, which I will not dispute with Otho; whose heart is so
busy about his own love, he has no leisure to consider his Sister; else I am
confident he would have spoken to me before he had engaged himself, or my
Father; and it is not the least of my troubles to find a Brother that I have
loved, so slightly to part with me to please another, without a thought of
Cicilia, or her future happiness; I must therefore tell you, Sir, I am engaged
to Lucius, who has honor and love for me; and humbly he has vowed it, and I
have kindness enough to see it. This I know is no secret to Otho


Engaged! how can you engage, or how dares Lucius receive it? have not you a
Father and a Brother? have they no share in Cicilia? sure you will make but an
unhandsome present, if you give their part without the consent of such friends


At least my own part is free for me to give, and that is Lucius his, the rest
you may give to Amadeo; and if Lucius keep his value, all the interest I have
in Cicilia is his, and nothing but Lucius shall make me forsake him


You are now in passion, yet that shall not make me lose my kindness, nor my
respect; nor can you wonder to find me surpised with this answer, since it is
the first time I heard Lucius his pretense had gained your heart; and what I
did in moving for Prince Amadeo, was in kindness; believing his love would be
welcome to you, without making you blush at the saying so; nor was this my
single opinion. But I have done; and since Lucius has forgot the respect he
owes to me and my Father, I shall find other ways to resent his injuries; he is
no Brother, yet, though Cicilia be a Sister


Nor Otho a Brother longer then he is just to Lucius; it is not threats nor
anger can prevail with me; I have too much of Otho's nature in me to be beaten
into any man's opinion; if your kindness and Reason cannot overcome me, your
anger shall not


Something I shall do.


This rash act of Otho has forced me to discover our Resolutions, which I meant
should have lain hid till Lucius could have made his way to my Fathers consent,
who has long since been acquainted with our frindship; and knows how much I
have been concerned in the honor and fortune of Lucius; I cannot therefore but
wonder he should give his consent to Amadeo, without speaking with me; it is not
of yesterday that we have been friends, and he has known it; nay, I know he has
not been displeased with Lucius his pretense; I will be better satisfied, for I
believe 'twill prove only the importunity of Otho; but I must mind the present
business; passionate men when they do injuries they are loath to see them; and
Otho is as much displeased as Lucius ought to be, and his threats are fit for
my fears; for I know Lucius will no more endure a threat then Otho will fear to
give it; something I must do in time to prevent what the pursuit of such a
passion may breed betwixt 'em: They are too much Lovers, for Reason or
Friendship to secure them; Clorinda is at stake in Otho's anger, concerned in
her Brothers love, equal with her own; and I am at stake with Lucius, who I am
vain enough to believe will not, for fear of any man's anger, quit his
pretention. These thoughts distract me. -- See Calis, she is come as if sent
from heaven; she shall know all, Otho pretends to; and she shall intimate to my
Father how unkindly I took Otho's motion; and how to the heart it struck me;
that after all the love and duty I had shown him, a Father could part so
slightly with me; and consent to rob Lucius of the reward of all his faithful
service, and give his friend to a stranger, unasked. --


Madam.


O Calis, there is an accident happened this morning, which will require both thy
kindness, friendship, and discretion, to manage our part of it; within my
friend shall know all


I met the Prince, and he would not speak with me: -- There is the Princess
too, I will speak my griefs to her before my fears take root, and try if her
friendship has kindness enough to weed them out. Hah! gone without speaking to
me


See, Madam, there he is,


It Is enough, away Calis; make haste, I will entertain him here while you
return


Leave the rest to me.


Otho's Injuries have made me forget those of Lucius; and my kindness has now
spent that stock of anger I had for him, that should have armed my Justice
against him


She is troubled too; I fear, Madam, my visits are unseasonable.


If there were nothing more unseasonable in Lucius his Heart then this visit,
he would not think so


Love, Madam, is a fruit always in season in a Lovers Heart; and other fruit
then Love Lucius his Heart never bare for the fair Cicilia


Why then, after all my kindness, does he fear his Harvest?


That storms, Thieves, or the wild Boar may destroy it.


But he is a Madman that will for fear of these possible ills afflict himself
as if they were come; or cut his Corn green to prevent the Lightning that might
blast it when it is ripe; And a jealous man is this Madman, and Jealousy will
be that storm, that Boar, that Thief you speak of; And if Lucius will not leave
conversing with that Enemy to Honor, which will break all bands and Laws of
Friendship, he will find too late the danger of such an Injury as pursues with
doubts and fears a Heart that loves him


This Remedy, Madam, will not cure the wounds that afflict my Mind, they are
too near of kin to my fears. Your anger was the greatest danger I apprehended;
and since that is fallen upon me for loving, what would not my Heart doubt
hereafter? Why should Cicilia be angry with Lucius for loving, if it did not
hinder her from receiving the Love of another


Yet I have kindness enough, notwithstanding this Answer, to tell Lucius when
ever I shall dare to be false, I shall not fear his displeasure; and a few
hours will show him, though Jealousy be at all times as unreasonable as the
fears of Cowards, (which makes them ridiculous when there is no danger, and
disarmes them when there is;) Yet, at this time it is most injurious; and if
Lucius be a Lover, he has no way but that to destroy his


It Is done, the Praetor was much troubled at the accident, he has sent to
command them both to their Chambers. The Prince was seized while I was there;
and Dyon is now coming with a Guard for Lucius


Hah! Dyon and a Guard, what will this be?


This Ring, Madam, will make my excuse; By virtue of which, and the Pretors
command, I beg your Highness leave to deliver his pleasure to the General


There is nothing, Sir, but Duty in this place.


My Lord, it is the Pretors pleasure you retire to your Chamber; where I shall
wait upon you till I receive further Orders


To my Chamber!


If I have any power, I shall beg of Lucius to submit to this command.


It Is enough, Madam; when your Highness says die, though I do notlove enough
to please, yet I shall obey you, though it be to become a sacrifice to my
Rival; Sir, you may execute your command, I am ready to obey


The Praetor commanded me, in his name, to prohibit your Lordship from sending a
Challenge to, or receiving any from, the Prince or any Man


What Riddle's this?


In the evening, at your Chamber, I will inform you of all: till when, let no
troubles afflict you


Madam, I can obey; and that is the true obedience, when we do it only to show
what power they have who command; without requiring any reason for them


Why did you not tell him the cause of the imprisonment?


Because I am loath to declare so absolutely against a Brother, as to join with
his Enemy against him; Therefore, dear Calis, go from me to Lucius, whom thou will find fuller of distraction then ever; tell him all that is past betwixt my
Father, Otho, and my self, concerning Amadeo, and his desires; Tell him of the
consent they have gained; but withal assure him, it is in the power of nothing
but Lucius to alter my Resolution; Tell him, I have confessed our Loves to
Otho, which bred his Anger, whose threats begot this Imprisonment; But then
conjure him to remember, Otho is my Brother, and not to think of a Revenge upon
him, if he loves Cicilia


I shall not fail to observe your directions.


Love is so short-lived, and subject to so many diseases, that few Lovers live
long enough to know their names or remedies; Nay, some die with Receipts by
them ere they know which to use; I am now to cure Lucius of his fears, and yet
observe the duty and kindness due to a Father and a Brother, though Otho
(unkind) to show his Love to Amadeo, forget a Friend in Lucius, and a sister in
Cicilia; And now how shall we remedy these ills? though We know how to cure
them, yet we are to seek the Ingredience; for though the Receipt be common, yet
where are the Drugs? Justice will cure all, but partial Love, in Otho, conceals
the remedy


PRince Otho, Sir, is a Prisoner too.


Do you know the Reason?


Not certain, there are diverse Reports.


Some say, that the Prince and Amadeo have from the Praetor obtained the
princess Cicilia, which bred a dispute betwixt him and the Princess


Ha! Prince Amadeo? has the Praetor given him his consent? Otho would not speak
to me this morning; foul! foul! that I am dull, cold, negligent Lucius


Prince Orante too is fled to Rome, disguised, as they say, with the news, and
some Injurious words that Otho gave him lately; In short, the Praetor and prince
are full of disorder, your Brother too is missing; observed to be dull and
melancholy of late, and does look much upon Clorinda


Orante is this day banished, at the Complaint of the Princess, to whom he
threatened violence, and has but three days to appear


It Is Amadeo, and Lucius must dispute this; and if thy fate give thee Cicilia,
I will wish thee all Honor and happiness; But know, neither her Father nor
Brother shall make me quit my Interest, though Cicilia her self join; the Sword
only shall decide our doubts. It Is visible now why she made me stay till Calis
returned, with whom she whispered when Dyon ent'red with the Guards; The plot
is visible, 'twas contrived betwixt her and Otho, this morning; to bind my
hands till they had past the Ceremonies of a wicked and a perjured Hymen; She
conjured me too I should remember Otho was her Brother, whose Interest has
prevailed; and, to please Clorinda, Lucius is to be sold, and condemned to
misery for ever; her stay too confirms my fear; for her promise was, her self
to come and clear my doubts; and Otho is made a Prisoner too, for fear of my
Revenge; it is clear as the Heavens she is foresworn by


He is strangely netled with this news; it makes me believe, there are some
grounds for these discourses concerning him and the Princess


Amadeo is yet at Liberty; I will find him before he has and, under a pretense
of a privacy when I write this Evening, make my escape; Cleon pray give Order
for a Pen, Ink and paper, I will write to the Praetor


You are sad, Sir; which the Noble Lucius cannot be, but all that love him must
be curious to know the cause; you wrong us too, if you conceal it; He is not
born, Sir, shall injure you; Pray tell us only the public part of the cause;
and if We can serve you, command us


I thank thee, Memnon; and if I thought both the Court and Camp had not been
full of it, I should my self have told you. Know then, Amadeo has broke my
Friendship with Otho, and his Sister; We have long been Rivals in Love and
Honor; But Amadeo has the odds; Clorinda is a powerfuller Argument, then all
my Services; she pleads with Otho; to please whom Lucius must be sacrificed to
Amadeos Love


I am glad to hear it is no worse.


No worse? do thou understand what I have said?


Yes, Prince Amadeo is your Rival. Will you kill all that love the Princess?
'twill be a great task, though Lucius undertake it; and when he has done, he
must fall upon his own sword too


What has he said?


By my faith, Sir, much reason methinks; and if you hate the Prince for loving
your Mistress, what would you do to him that should hate her


Kill him.


So you would do this that loves her, if you had your will; how ridiculous
would this be, in one of us, that should dispute the rewarding Love and hate
alike? Well, Sir, I am glad you have no other cause of trouble; By this light,
I thought the Prince had raised some scandal upon her, struck her, or ravished
her; these Injuries, I confess, had been fit for your rage and our Revenge; But
to be angry with a prince, and sad, because he loves an Excellent, virtuous,
beautiful maid


This is thy sense, Memnon; But love has his own reason; and though he gives
Laws, he will take none; and Love has said, he cannot Love his Rival; and if
Love be against you, what will your Reason avail


But the General had wont to give Reason place; even in his Anger, and his
wounds, he would not be averse to Reason; else I should not venture thus rudely
to give him my opinion. Pray, Sir, tell me, is it a Crime to love, or a sin to
be loved? for in one of these two lies the guilt; if it be a sin in either, why
are you so partial to believe your self Innocent for doing that which is a
Crime in the prince? whose Love is Honor, rather then prejudice to you, and
but justifies to the world that you have placed your Affection upon a deserving
person; and this Injurious jealousy of yours, but shakes her Resolution; and,
by disgusting of her heart, gives more ground to your Rival then ever his
Addresses could have won. Were I the General, who would should love my Mistress
better then I, so she loved me better then him; And then my Rival should break
my neck as soon as my sleep, upon that score. Rivals are so many Witnesses and
Arguments, so many Affidavites, that she has honor, so many Bucklers to defend
her against the Envy and malice of the world; and when you fold her in your
Arms, they become so many Trophies of your Victory; Rivals are, in Loves war,
as Prisoners, Colors, and the Cannon; Win the Battle, and lead them all in
Triumph


I confess, this is wild reason, yet such as I cannot deny; but what can you
say to hinder me from hating and seeking to be Revenged on both, when you shall
know the Prince tempted her, and she has broke her faith? and as I loved the
virtuous Cicilia, so I hate this; for she is false, though she prove true to
Amadeo


Faith, Sir, if this be so, (which few will believe) my Counsel is, that you
should be silent; for she has such a stock of Reputation in the world, as no
single Opinion, nor any one Action, can waste; and 'twill not be for your
Honor, while the world esteems her, to say, I am that Lucius that the Princess
Cicilia loved once, but she is now unconstant; it is the same thing, as to say,
you had like have cozened her, but she found her Error: Hide this misfortune,
rather, as some imperfection; it is a story better forgot; for either, you were
deceived in her, or she in you; it is clear, one of you wanted your value; Come,
Sir, let no man think to get any advantage over his Mistress, or, to add to his
own Esteem, by saying she is false; for no worthy man ever let a Gallant Woman
be false; it is not possible to destroy a perfect Friendship, you may destroy
nature as soon


This plain speech has posed him; and if not cured his jealousy, yet he has so
vexed him, I hope the Nobler Passion, anger, will possess him; This damned
jealous sickness is as ill in a lover, as a Coward in a Soldier


Cleon, you have heard all this, and your silence makes me curious to know your
sense of my suffering; you have studied and traveled in your time, and are now
a Soldier; how would you have born my part in these three several Conditions;
When you were a Courtier, how would you have born it, had you found your
Mistress false


Faith, Sir, in those youthful days I dwelt in the Garden where they grew; and
when I found my self injured, as a withered Flower I forgot her, and still
gathered some new Rose unblown with the praise or flattery of any; in whom I
fancied still more pleasing Graces far then the former had


This was, when you were a young Courtier, Cleon; But now you are a Soldier,
whose Passions, both of Love and Anger, are not only Excusable, but laudable


Why, I would have given her love the lie, and in her new lovers face spit the
vows and faith she gave me, and, to vex her, Cut his throat


Ha! it is but just a Soldiers anger should be revenged, not reasoned, nor
argued into Peace; no Quarter to his Rival, nor violence to his Mistress; I
love thee, Cleon, and thou and I will talk further on this business


Pray, Sir, ask him how his Philosophy would have born it; hear all, and then
choose


I would, as near as I could, have imitated History, which delivers many
stories to us, by which are preserved the honored memories of chaste and
virtuous Lovers, of both Sexes, whose Friendship stands high in Story; Many too
are the blots that stain even the sheets they are writ in, whose black Actions
and names are left as Terrors and whips, to deter mankind from becoming like
them, the hated subjects of succeeding ages; Yet nothing has met my wonder
more, nor bred my amazement so often, as to find that excellentest of
Creatures, Women, whose body and Nature, when virtuous, are so tender that we
pity them if the wind blow sharp upon them; Yet when lust has prevailed, and
armed them, you would start to read where they have taken the sullen Murderer
by the hand, and undaunted led him through difficulties even those men shrink
at; Nay the murderers heart has become soft; Poison has lost her force, and
the Dagger his point, to save what they have doomed to death


No more Cleon; heaven keep Cicilia from breaking with the gods, if she should
be false to men


Your patience, Sir, that I may Vindicate History, and my own memory, in being
Just to that Sex whose very Nature is softness, and these but the Monsters and
depraved part of that Excellent Creature, lest the world believe I only such
the Poison out of History; Where I find more Excellency in that Sex then you
once fancied in the divine Cicilia; where the Crimes of the wicked have not
arrived to the sufferings of the good. Their constancy in Love, their often and
patient becoming Martyrs to Friendship and Honor, as far beyond the merits, as
faith of men, scarce one of them trusting that has not been betrayed by our
perjured Sex; Mercy being their Nature, and oftentimes their Enemy, having
rendered them miserable; For could they see us sad, they might laugh; But their
pity of false men makes many of their Scenes set in tears and blood; and it is
as rare to find a Constant man, as a faulty Woman; Yet I find History condemns
revenge in either, Mercy in the last Act being as becoming a gallant Lover, as
Love in the First, so to strive to win from the world a handsome Character, by
forgetting and forgiving each others crimes; and those who seek by Revenge to
vindicate themselves; The guilty has from that found pity, and their Rage stood
condemned by gods and men; Yet, in this latter Age, we have delivered our
selves up to a mistake of Honor; and Custom has made it so binding, that it is
not to be disputed against, it is by Duel; which vain and Choleric men embrace
with Joy, as a quick way for the one to be known to the World, and the other to
be revenged of the World; Nay, wise men submit to it now, as a necessity; and
though, in your case, some would fight, Yet there are diverse would not; Much is
to be said for them both, and against them, and the wild Justice of a Duel;
but he that disputes it must be some one that is known to plead against his own
practice; for whoever will be heard to declaim against Duels must fight many
first; and when his valor is undoubted, his Reason may prevail; but where to
find such an Orator as will use his Rhetorique to persuade the people to


I am glad to find there is so much of the old Lucius left, as will give over
rather then be beaten


Have not I fitted him for a grave speech?


Yes, I dare say, if he had thought thou could have remembered so much of
Books, he would have broke thy head rather then opened thy memory with a
Question; he looked for a Satyr, or some Ralliry


I guest as much, but thought this the shorter way; A pox on it, they know we
are Soldiers, and have other business then to observe him while he besieges
one woman, and defends another all his days; if he had staid, I was coming into
mine own element; he knows we are Soldiers and Travelers; fit people to
decide Questions in Platonic Love, that have been bred in the liberty of other
Nations, whose kindness has engaged me to defend that sweet sin he speaks
against; if he had asked me what I would have ventured to enjoy another man's
Mistress, it is a case I have been versed in, and he might have been resolved;
but for the revengeful part, By my troth, I am to seek; for I never had any
Mistress of mine own yet, upon which I ever cared to shut the door when I went
out; that and Marrying I defy; my experience has taught me it is so much
cheaper and easier to get another man's Woman, then keep mine own; and now he is
gone, prithee be free; do thou think the Princess a Rogue, Sirrah? By this
light, if she be


And what if she be?


If she be, I am sure I am one; and I cannot choose but hope; and if she be one
of us, let Cleon alone to tell his tale; come, come, let us away


And if Cleon does not, let me alone to tell it to the Princess.


Well, well: when you dare tell, it will be a jest for Cleon to laugh at as
well as Memnon


SUre, Love makes me his scorn; and I that could not love any now dote upon
all; Clorinda wiped Calis from my mind; the one sighs too much, and the other
has too much anger in her eyes; and now all her graces fall too, since I saw
Cicilia; in whom there is not more virtues, then difficulties; it is hard to say
whether my Lover despair be greatest; why did my Brother and Amadeo praise her
so to me or having praised her not hid her from mine eyes? either vanity or
madness made them send me to her, for my destruction; my way was prepared too,
by a friendly character; That I heard nothing but praises of Manlius from her,
even then admiring Manlius for friendship and honor when his heart was busy
how to destroy a Brother and a Friend: yes, those are the ties, those are the
impossibilities that I must labor against; yet their Love, Birth nor Merit, I
fear not; for though they started before me, they shall not make more haste
then I to gain the prize, could I reconcile the action to my self; but it is a
breach of trust and faith to both, both have told me their several passions,
and sent me as an indifferent friend to solicit their hopes; Lucius, though
he believed I loved Clorinda, yet that knowledge could not make him doubt an
unjust action from me; and Amadeo, though I was his Rivals Brother, such a
stock I had amongst them that the ties of Nature, nor interest of affection,
could not make these men fear Manlius, who till he saw Cicilia was as honest as
they were just; and could till then have defied the world to accuse me of one
wry step, or one stumble in the whole practice of my life, where honor was
concerned; but now by what curse I know not, friendship, honor and virtue seem
slight; her smiles are preferred before gods or men; yet how many crimes must
both of us act ere I can enjoy her friendship: I love my Brother, his nature
and sweetness of humor, so stout and kind it wins even upon his enemies;
Amadeo too, how shall I look him in the face when I have betrayed his trust?
their angers will be too just for the boldest man to meet; but that danger is
the least, there is but sword to sword, and fortune may be as well on my side,
as justice on theirs; and could I answer it to honor and friendship, I should
not then make this dispute; but it is the friend, not the enemy threatens, and
that will wound my soul ere I can be an enemy too; for my anger though it has
been as fatal as any man's, yet it is most unreasonable here; and therefore I
must take some quiet secure way to gain my ends; how unwilling I am to be a
villain! ye gods that see excuse, or divert the crime; but what if she will not
receive my love, what rests for me? 'twill be too late to put back when I have
discovered the villain; she will hate, and they despise me; and I shall sell
all my past honors for a shadow; what rests then? Force. Ha! good gods! what
may not man be if he will once break the bounds of honor? see if I have not
already swallowed the great difficulties of Friend and Brother, and given up
that honor I have preserved through a thousand hazards; and lust, finding it
self master, would not only reign, but bring in murder too; sure I was never
honest, never stout, all my fighting was but cowardice, nothing but fear to dye
made me defend my self; If I had either honor or courage in my heart, they
would now defend me against my self, and make me ashamed to yield my sword to
lust and treachery; sure if it were ever lawful to kill, it is now; for a
greater villain then my self no man can strike. -- See this Dagger prompts me
to it; the act will be noble, having first in two short li^es writ the cause;
then to stab and dye, she could not choose but love me when she shall know I
fell in this strife, her martyr; I will do it; since I cannot live worthy her
love, it is resolved I will dye to find her pity. -- Ha! see, see, ye gods, she
comes, her eyes shake my resolution.


Calis stays long, Lucius will be impatient to know the cause of his
imprisonment; see his Brother, he is sad; I will take this opportunity to try
if I can find who it is he loves; and while Calis is busy to serve my friend,
I will try if I can advance her desires, though my mind a^ this time be not
bent to mirth. -- What makes the gallant Manlius so sad? thoughts are such
strangers to his humor, that it is a civil curiosity to inquire the cause; sure
something new and excellent must be happened that is able to disorder his mind
whose happy Stars have made him all he can, in honor, wish; is it your
Brothers imprisonment, Sir, that troubles you? if it be, let me assure you,
there is neither dishonor nor danger in it. -- Ha! he minds me not, or at least
will not trust me Manlius knows that I at first sight gave him all the secrets
my heart ever swelled with; and if he refuse me his friendship, I shall belleve
he thinks me not worthy of his Brothers love, or else grudges me his kindness


Heaven and earth witness; and I guilty? who knows his fate till he proves it?
how beautiful, even in her hatred, will the Cicilia appear; but thus adorned
with friendship, and her words thus clothed in kindness, how divine, how
charming every grace! there is Magic in every sound, her words whisper my soul
to be happy, and something bids me be a villain; if the loves, I shall be happy
enough, in her embraces, to weigh down the opinion of the whole world besides


What strange accident is befallen him that can make him thus silent; there is
distraction, fear and wonder in his looks, and all I say passes without regard


I will speak to her, she is alone. -- Does not your Highness find a new kind
of character here? is not Manlius his misery visible in his forehead


Yes, and 'twas my wonder.


My distracted heart and troubled mind, are they not writ so plain in my face
that your fair eyes may find and read my fortune there


It Is true, and one whose eyes are less concerned then mine may find a new kind
of humor in every look; every motion tells something strange is happened in
Manlius his fortune; and my heart has so much gratitude and kindness for him,
that if it lay in my power, I would serve him faithfully; but finding him un
willing to impart them to so idle a subject as Cicilia, I shall leave you; lest
my company be as troublesome as my Question


Why this, if not more? why should she tempt me thus, if her heart had not love
she never showed, nor I durst hope before? I will tell her I love her, she is a
woman; and what if she once had honor, so had I; yet she had power to blow
that bubble hence, and who knows but that I am designed her fate, as she was
mine


Ha! he sighs and weeps; why these tears, Manlius? why these sighs? what can
thy heart wish or desire within the bounds of honor that Manlius should
despair of? pray tell me your griefs, I may be a friend where you least believe
it; for I know something; and, perhaps, have seen what you would fain have hid.
-- Sure he loves Clorinda, and is ashamed to think of his faults to Calis.


Know, Madam, your kindness has ripp'd open my heart; and now take a secret, the
first and last of my life; too great for my heart, though too little for her I
would present it to; a fatal one, I fear, and yet it is love; doubting, humble,
and faithful love


Then the gods have heard the wishes of his friends, if Manlius be a Lover.


Ha! what does my surpised heart hear? does your Highness rejoice to find
Manlius a Lover? that glad sound has struck confused joy to my heart; nor do I
know how to understand that joy of yours


O Manlius, thy noble Brother and my self have often wished thee a Lover, to
refine thy mind, and weed some harshness, and those wild thoughts from it,
which like weeds infest the noble flowers that nature had planted, and honor
watered in thy Soldiers heart; love in Manlius is all he ought to wish for, or
his friends rejoice in; love will make him envied by those that hate him, and
adored by those that love him; of which number none is a more real admirer then
Cicilia; and happy she, who ever she be, that is born to reign in thy heart;
for Manlius has courage, and all that is required to make a happy friendship;
and now I beg to know who it is, that after a curious and a long search Manlius
has found worthy of his faith


O Madam, when you know that you will hate me, and say I have reason to be sad,
and curse those Stars that have cursed you and me; can the noble Cicilia see a
Lover in my eyes, and not find who it is by my actions? is Manlius so general a
Lover that his passion cannot be discerned? Is he such a dumb distracted thing
in all companies, that his disorder cannot speak her name he bows to? must my
trembling tongue tell her name ere your Highness discern it


Alas, Sir, my busy heart has been so intent upon her own business, I never
observed it diligently till now; but rather then be troublesome to Manlius, I
shall wait his leisure, and not rudely press into his secret thoughts, unless I
can serve him; and then he wrongs me if he conceal his love, who will to the
world avow the friendship and value my heart has for him


Why shall I be silent longer? I will tell her I love the gentle Cicilia. --
Stay, Madam, and take the secret of my soul, -- 'Twill not out; I have yet so
much honor as to guard the door Cicilia is the object; and if you be curious
to know how much; to death, by all. --


Hold, no more; my busy innocence, and folly, you have in two words
sufficiently punished; yet you will find we are both deceived; I in a vain
false opinion that Manlius had honor, and was worth my friendship; I should
not else thus have betrayed my self within his power, where he shall find his
part too, for having so low a thought as durst doubt my honor; but since I
have found him false, I shall live to repent my error, as he will do this mean
opinion of me; Go hide thy self, false man, till thou can repent the injury
thou have done thy Brother; and if there be any spark of that honor left in
thy heart which the world took fire at, let shame kindle that flame again; Go
repent, sleep, and forget this treacherous act, and wake again worthy of thy
Brother and thy friend; I have yet so much kindness as to be sorry for thee;
and if thy fault dies here, for thy Brothers sake, it passes as a dream, and
we will awake, to morrow, friends again, else thy love shall not exceed my hate
and scorn; No reply; I have an Argument in mine own heart pleads for thee, more
then all thy words can do


What a fool was I to put my self into the power of fortune, whose blind
partial hands have still opposed me? vain deity, by me no more valued when thou
fawnest, then when thou frownest; but more despised for thy false flattery when
thou smiledst in the beginning of our discourse, then thou art hated now, when
thou have declared thy self and her mine enemy; thou found'st me, this morning,
relying upon honor and virtue, whose faithful protection had I not abandoned
to lean upon thy rouling-wheel, I had still kept the honor of Manlius; who
striving to become one of thy Minions is now left fit for Chains and Greaves;
which of thy hated great ones attain to honor, but they are at last hurried to
fates more violent then their fortunes? I am now embarked, and engaged beyond
my own knowledge; and dare not find safety from the counsel of my friends; now
the blackness of this act appears when I dare not tell my friends how miserable
I am; this shame is only left me for a sting to my soul; and all the Reason and
Honor I have left is only to make me ashamed of what I have done; Calis too,
my last counsel; her kindness is barred at this time; yet something I must do
to lose the old Manlius, or to find the new


THough I am not guilty of Otho's fault to the Princess, yet I am afraid to
appear before her; and methinks, there is a kind of guilt in being unlucky
where we love; and Otho's kindness too hastily employed, has, I fear, gained me
her displeasure yet her justice makes me hope when my innocence shall appear,
'twill find her pardon; for if I find her heart given to my Rival, Heaven
forbid I should oppose her desires, but rather with sacrifice of my own give
her back the promise and engagement of a Father and a Brother; for Amadeo shall
never receive his Mistress but from her own hands


Sir, this paper is directd to your Highness; does it require no answer?


Follow me to the Princess Cicilia's lodging, and you shall have your answer.


He is grown vain and insolent already; Death! is the Princesses Chamber become
your place of audience already? Hell upon him, he will date it from their bed,
if I prevent not their speedy Hymen's, I am mad with rage; Cicilia came not
neither, nor Calis, as she promised; Manlius is sullen too, and out of the way
when I should use his counsel; the whole frame of friendship is fallen in
pieces, as if the world conspired to make Lucius miserable, without the remedy
or protection of one friend to advise him; yet kind fate has left this to
protect me. -- But while I talk, and forget my Cicilia, or a revenge for her,
were to exceed all sick men, or chained slaves in scorn and misery


SPeak with no body!


'Twas his command.


Come, I will make your excuse, for disobeying him this time.


Pray, Madam, pardon us; till he calls we dare not open the door.


Do you fear I should bring him a challenge? well, Sir, I will retire; and when
you see him, pray, tell him that I was here to have spoken with him from the
Princess Cicilia; and I believe he will not thank you for refusing me the door.
-- This passionate man will suck poison out of every flower; and I know his
jealous Revenge as well as Injury for the Lover. I am now to find the Princess,
and when she shall know he refused to speak with me, it is ten to one but she
grows as angry as he is jealous. They have indeed both their diseases, though
from different causes; which I fear will never be cured till they are bound in
a pair of sheets together; Hymen and a Bed some Physicians hold a certain cure
for Love; would Manlius and I had honestly tried the Receipt


SHe is all a perfect Mine of Virtue; no one thought but has a guard, such as
Modesty and perfect Honor set over the Hearts of Princes; Her words werefull
of Justice, and though she conceived her self injured and neglected in her
Brothers Treaty, yet her Answers were calm and full of civil sense; still
mentioning me and my passion with respect and sadness, which has so divided my
thoughts I know not how to proceed; If I pursue her against her will, there is
nothing but hatred to be expected. I will observe her, and make Clorinda break
my way either to her Love or Friendship; and if my Fortune will not make me
hers, yet I will have the pleasure of contributing my own peace to the making
her as happy as she desires. -- This paper I had forgot: Ha! from Lucius

SIR, I Have this Evening broke Prison, and so I shall all Laws and Civility
too, rather then outlive the Injury your Highness has done me. The Princess
Cicilia is a Jewel nothing but your Sword can win from me; though her Ambition
has made her break her Faith. And since I can promise my self no longer the
being beloved, I am resolved to be revenged, or fall in the attempt. This
Morning I shall expect your Highness under the wood side by Juno 's Temple,
where I shall attend you alone with my Sword only. The Honor I have had to
know your Highness makes me not doubt the receiving this satisfaction, that I
may at least preserve my Honor, though the rash Cicilia has falsely profaned
hers. --

Lucius.

Fond Lucius, do thou need more Enemies then thy self? Thy wild injurious
Heart has wronged a Princess, whose least thoughts thou art unworthy of; and,
for her sake I will meet thee; and if my Innocence be any guard, I shall punish
thy low thoughts of the most excellent of Women. Cicilia break her Faith? Vain
and and false? He would have me believe she has given it him. Fool! She knows
too well the value of that Jewel to give it thy savage Heart. Rash Cicilia!
Rash Lucius rather, whose madness has now made room for my hopes, and given an
occasion I could not have hoped for; And I shall take it, to show how much I
loved the Princess, and how little thou deservest to be preferred before me.
Sure no Man of Honor could ever have thought he should have occasion to draw
his Sword in the defense of the Princess Cicilia's Honor against one that knew
her. And who knows but Fortune has appointed this Injury to give me the
advantage of the Sword against Lucius, who thus long took Romes Sword, not to
fight his Countries quarrel, but his private interest; and pursued me as his
Rival, not Romes Enemy. I will instantly find him. -- Hah, Clorinda


Brother, saw you the Prince since his confinement?


Yes, and he is as much to seek for the cause as they will be for satisfaction
that caused it; We hear Lucius is a Prisoner too


I believe the cause is easily guessed; you know the Prince and his Sister have
this Morning disputed with some heat and Choler concerning our affairs; Lucius
too is informed that the Praetor has given his consent at the desire of Otho;
and the displeasure the Princess showed her Brother is but a spark of that Fire
you are to expect from Lucius, whose nature can never endure, nor dissemble his
troubles; whence came you now


From making my excuse to the Princess, where I received so civil a resentment
of my proceedings, that her dislike was but one degree of less Obligation then
the acceptance of my Love would have been. For I must confess, my Reason
Honors the Princess when she acts great things; and to be faithful is most
Princely. It Is like her self, to avow her Friendship; yet her words were full
of civility, and, in all her expressions as just to me, as kind to Lucius; And
that Civil Justice shall bind me as much as her Love can my Rival. And though
his pretense may be more fortunate then mine, yet who ever shall give a true
Character hereafter of Amadeo's Love, the world shall say, he owes nothing to
Honor nor Cicilia's Friendship


Be yet so kind to me as to visit the Prince, who is now our Prisoner; to whom
pray say all that a Maid is fit to justify, all that Amadeo's Sister should
say when such a Lover wooes, and such a Brother counsels, while I find the
Princess, and take the first occasion I can handsomely to present your
Resolutions


Farewell, dear Clorinda; I shall not fail to visit the Prince as soon as I have
dispatched a business which concerns me to give audience in this Morning. Live
and Love, thy Brother, dear Clorinda


Love my Brother!


THis is the place, within this wood I will expect him; I wonder he is thus
late; guilt has his sting, though in the Courage of Amadeo; when he is to
justify an ill action he is even slow in coming


Revenged? upon whom? foul Revenge is due to thee, not from thee; Thou have
injured a Friend, a Brother, and a Mistress; and thou talkst of being revenged,
of which of these? good Heaven! whither am I fallen? Reason and Honor are dead
within my Heart, and the Coward is crept into this breast, else I could save
all yet; Thus: this Sword bent against the Traitor here would do it yet; But
Honor has lost his power, Lust and Revenge reign Tyrants over my Heart,
Revenge: whose pleasure is of so short a reign, it scarce out-lasts a thought
longer then the storms that Injuries and Anger raise; and who enjoyes it most
is most Beast, and shows more wicked nature then all the several vices that Man
was born subject to; Nay, it is hard to say, who repents a revengefull Mind
most, the Revenger or the sad subject of his Revenge; That I, who this Morning
was a Lover, should before night degenerate into such contraries as Hate, and
desire to destroy the thing I loved, it starts my Soul. I that would have dyed
this Morning to have served or pleased Cicilia, am now bent at the rate of all
that is precious to Man, Honor, Health, and Peace of Mind, to seek her
despite, and, with hazard of mine own life, strike Lucius, though a Brother,
which she nor Nature can longer protect; For though my Heart tells me he is my
Brother, yet she has said he is my Rival; which very thought has more mystery
in it; then I shall live to understand. That I should have reason to know this,
and not have power to master that impious Passion! They have too much reason
who affirm there is a Fate in all things, which commands above our Reason; and
it is vanity in Man to think or resolve he will be virtuous: His Stars laugh at
him; and what is writ in Heaven we must act, for we but play our parts here;
how would the world wonder else, when they shall read this part of my story?
Manlius, that in his youth did something like Honor, and aspired at nothing
but a fair Fame, proud of the worlds esteem; Now, when he has found the highest
Object Honor and Virtue can work upon, which is to Love handsomely, without
any design or hope of Reward more then such a virtuous action brings; To know
this, and to despise all the rewards that the Gods and Cicilia must owe to such
an action, and sacrifice to Revenge all that a Brother, a Friend, and a
Mistress claim, must beget miseries which already beget my despair. Love, if
thou be a God, as thy blindness has led me to this precipice, thou have
wings though no Eyes; and 'twill be Justice to lend me them to save me; else
this new kind of madness will find too late a pity. My Hate levels at all,
Brother and Friend are not out of distance. What she loves I must hate, my
Rival cannot be my friend; nor can I with patience think she should be any
others, though I know she will never be mine; But woe to the happy Lover who
ever he be, it is not Brother nor Friend shall protect him. Calis too, though I
never said I loved, yet I have listened to what she has said of modest and kind;
so that this crime of mine cannot stab less then four; for each base act that I
commit, she will bleed though innocent. -- Ha, what noise is that? it is
Horsemen; sure I am pursued, I will take the covert of


This by the description should be the place, yonder are the Hermits Houses,
and there is the Temple


I Come not, Madam, to justify the mistaken kindness of Prince Otho, whose
Friendship to me out-ran the respect was due to your Highness; when I desired
him to speak for my Brother, his Love mistook the Object, and without either of
our knowledge moved it to the Praetor. This we both started at when he told us
the success, and feared what your just disdain would do, when you should find
we had not paid the duty and civility a Lover owes to such a Mind, whom we
first ought to have prepared, being the chief concerned in Love and Hymen. This
Truth, Madam, has faults enough, and therefore we may hope to find belief; and
this Error which a Brother committed, we hope for a Brothers sake may be
pardoned


Your Highness had need make no more excuse; though, I confess I was something
troubled at the first; But since I received a visit from the Prince, I am so
far from accusing him when I perceived his Innocence; I think he will confess,
I said more to let him see I was not angry, then I should have done to have
pleased another; For give me leave to tell you, Clorinda, in all her kindness,
has not more value for Prince Amadeo, then I have. But love him I must not.
Cicilia is not worth her esteem when she is false to her vows, which (I
confess,) I have given Lucius; and nothing but Lucius can absolve that vow.
Death, or Lucius his faults, can only set Cicilia free; This I would have told
the Prince, but that I was loath to add to his griefs a knowledge that might
make him hate my friend or me


I know my Brothers Heart so well, I am confident he will worship this Virtue
in your Highness, equal to all the blessings of the world beside; and when he
shall know your Heart has pity for him, Honor will change his Love to
Friendship and Adoration; and he will still worship the fair Cicilia, without


What paper is that?


I know not, Madam.


It Is directed to Prince Amadeo. I shall not be so curious to know the secret.


Not I, Madam, till you read it; I am certain my Brother has no secrets he
would hide from Cicilia, since she knows he loves


I should know this hand, it is Lucius his Character, my Heart fails me; This
paper bodes some mischief


She is troubled, pray, Madam, read it without any scruple.


I confess, I would fain be satisfied, for I have as much Interest in the
Character as Clorinda has in the direction, it is Lucius his hand


Heaven forbid my fears, pray give it me, -- it is a challenge from Lucius.


This I feared; Calis, a word; Your Pardon, Madam.


Something I must do to prevent this mischief; who that had read this paper
would hereafter trust the Love of any, since Lucius can be thus faulty to such
a person; My Heart begins to doubt, Otho may have his faults too, but this is
no time to talk


Gone?


Gone Sir; he leaped his window that looked into the Garden.


Prince Amadeo is from his Lodging too, and was seen to ride out alone this
Morning


Take the Guards and follow them with all dilgence; disperse your selves, and
if it be possible prevent them


Stay, my Lord; Sir, if you please to read this paper, 'twill direct you where
you may certainly find them; I found it in the Gallery this Morning.


Insolent and false, thou shall find what it is to despise my Orders, and
violate the Roman Protection given a Prince; beside what my Justice shall
inflict upon thee, that durst without my leave, treat this saucy Friendship
with my Daughter; and not only rob me of the Duty of a Child, but
dishonourably seek to take her fair Name from her. Lysander, and Dyon, haste to
the Grove, where Juno's Temple stands, there is the place of appointment; Alive
or dead bring him to our Justice. Dyon, you know me, look I be not disobeyed;
Some of you call Cicilia hither, and set a strong Guard upon Otho. Your pardon,
Madam; this trouble has made me thus long forget my respect to you; This
Insolence showed to the Prince, and despising of the Roman Discipline, has
robbed me of my patience; But I shall give his Highness full satisfaction, and
with his blood make him an example


Heaven forbid, Sir; I know Amadeo will sooner die for him, then bring any such
sad Calamity to his friends, and there is much to be said on both sides. You
have high Reason, and ought to have the first place, as his and Romes General,
doubly injured in your blood and power; Yet Love and heat of youth have their
Friends that plead for Lucius. And we cannot expect, Sir, a Soldier and a
Lover enraged should find place for Reason. Honor and Opinion slave the world
too much; Lucius is a Roman; and from Romes example where he finds
difficulties he draws his Sword to remove them; See the Princess


His displeasure is high, for his Orders were to kill him if he resisted, or
else to bring him alive to Justice; You know how strict the Roman Discipline
is, upon such a breach as this, to which is added Personal Injuries; and if
your Highness do not interpose, 'twill be sad; there is no safety for him if
you show a displeasure


Though he has injured me, I will not be so unjust to condemn him, before I
hear him speak; fear not, Calis, it is not the anger of others shall make me
forget what I owe to Lucius; and though he has done a rash act in disobeying my
Father and my self, yet I will look upon that disobedience as Love to me; and
Heaven forbid I should join to punish him for faults committed upon that score


I sent to speak with you; did you know any thing of this business?


Nothing but what my fears prompted me to, and that I gave you an Account of by
Calis


If he hold his appointment, I shall at last have my Revenge upon him.


I am sorry to find your Highness thus bent against a Person whose Friendship
to me has been thus long known to my Father; It Is true, this act is not to be
defended, but I am consident I need neither blush the becoming his Mediator,
nor my Father be ashamed to let my importunity prevail against the severity of
that Law that condemns my Friend. -- Which thus I do upon my knees, interposing
my Tears to save from your displeasure


Rise; you must not plead for such an insolent offender; Innocence comes in
question when it appears so partial in the intercession for the Guilty.


Sir, my Interest in all his sufferings plead for him, Lucius his guilt is my
pride; Lucius his crimes is love of me, and here again I profess him my Friend;
I love the Man, and if you punish him you make his crimes mine in the
Affliction; and though I had no hand in his guilt, yet I shall feel all his
punishment, such is the mystery of Friendship; You cannot execute him alone,
and I am as innocent as the Law you would revenge; and your Justice upon Lucius
is unjust upon me; so that to satisfy an Injury, you will murder a Daughter.
This beloved Guilt, this affected Malefactor has won my Heart; even this Crime
is an Obligation. My Friendship shared in all his good, and shall I abandon him
in his misery? Heaven forbid. You know, Sir, in his healthy hours, in his days
of Triumph, Lucius left not me out. Can I then with Honor share with him in
his glories, and abandon him in this sad afflicted Fortune, where I am the
cause too? It cannot, it must not be. You may deny me his life, but know then,
you cannot persuade me to outlive him. Nothing shall say, Lucius was so much
gallanter then Cicilia, as to die for her that would not in his Funeral bear
him company


While Lucius knew how to be a Soldier, I loved and preferred him; But grown
Insolent, and perverted in his Nature; as his virtues found my Friendship, so
his crime shall feel my Justice, till he stands in story an example of both


When Lucius was in health he needed none of your Physic; and now he is sick,
you will not afford him a remedy; Innocent Lucius feared not your power, even
that power which his sword has confirmed, though now you threaten his noble
life with it. Nor will the world wonder why I plead for him: Is guilty Lucius
such a common Theme? Were he not guilty, why should I bow my knees? A Daughter
to one, and a Friend to the other? Are her tears no tie? Are her knees bowed,
and her hands held up, of no force with a Father for a Friend? Is there nothing
due to these? Common Miseries find common Remedies; And my Father may by a
thousand ways show his Justice, though how for my sake he show Lucius Mercy


Fond Girl, Thy kindness but heaps coals upon his head, and speaks him a black
Villain to injure a person so far above him both in Love and Honor


My Reason, Sir, loved him once, and my Love makes me pity him now; his Virtues
overcame me then, and I but imitated the world in loving him. Thousands were
Lucius his Virtues, thousands were his glories, and ten thousand were the ties
he has laid upon the world; Single is this hatred, Sir, single his Crime,
single your Justice too, and in that, Cruel. Lucius was ever glorious, and but
once guilty. Ye Gods! who would through such narrow ways and crooked paths,
with difficulties, hunt for flying Honor, if her wealth prove such a burden
unto Men, that even with Friends an Age of Virtue cannot weigh down one rash
Act? Lucius for one Crime dies, for whom a thousand generous actions past could
not prevail; and Cicilia, from a cruel parent must return denied. But I have
yet anger enough left to laugh at those that believe this Cuelty can make way
for any low design


See fond Wretch, blush and hate thy Folly. Read Lucius, and see to what a
miserable Fate thou art arrived, after thy having given thy Honor, Duty, and
Brothers kindness to purchase a Friendship with a Jealous, Choleric, Insolent
Youth. Go, haste to the Temple, make him your Lord, that he may choose some
other Beauty to pay his broken vows to



