THE SECOND PART OF Bellamira her Dream: OR, THE Love of Shadows. A
TRAGI-COMEDY, The Scene NAPLES and SICILY

Written in VENICE, BY THOMAS KILLIGREW.

DEDICATED TO THE Lady ANN VILLIERS COUNTESS OF SUSSEX.

LONDON: Printed by J. M. for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the sign of the Blew Anchor, in the lower Walk of the New-Exchange. 1663

NO Mutiny Friend, the Day being ours, our Swords have given us Title to all
you have


Your Throat is mine too, and be still while he geld your Pocket, or I shall
spoil your Drinking


Can you answer this to your Officer? He commanded you to see me safe to his
Tent, else no such base hands as yours should have had power to have bound me


Come Sir; these hands are as proper to pick your Pocket as the best in the
Army, What Is here? A Chain, by my faith,


Do You hear, Brother, no pocketing; lay all down, fair play, and when we have
done, divide


Yes, yes, what is that? A Jewel? Is It right?


If it prove false we'll have his -- in the room; this was no small Fool.


And his Ransom will be no Bauble, and let me alone to use him ill enough to
make him hasten it


Let me go, and I Will pay it, to either, and by all the Gods swear secrecy.


Ha! hum!


What is it he says?


Something that carries reason if we durst trust him.


D' ye hear? either trust him and let him go, or cut his Throat; for if he
lives to see the Prince, he will tell what he has lost; and then we must not
only restore all, but put fair for hanging


And 'twould be a sad business to change this Gold chain for a halter; My
Friend, turn to the Tree and pray, for I am resolved not to lose one link of
this chain for your span of days; How fine my Girl will be when she has it on


Just as fine as mine, 'twill burn your fingers else; that as the rest must be
divided


No, no, it is pity to spoil it; take you his Clothes in consideration of half;
Come Friend, dispatch this matter


Villain, will thou rob me and murder me too? Take heed, thy wants may plead
for the one, but no excuse will save thee


Nay, nay, no sentences; Pray, if you can, or die, overseen, and say you were
fairly advised; 'twill be so, indeed it will; I cannot afford it cheaper, will
you dispach


Villain!


Yet 'ere you do it, I shall make bold with this. -- (Half is my right, and
I Will have it.


It may be so, but I shall see you prove that right ere I quit it.


Hell that gave a Mind to men full of Avarice, and corrupted Souls, Lust for
wealth, send Discord the fruit of that cursed metal to fill their Hearts


Let it go.


I will not.


So, so, that blow will be revenged, I hope; I have a weapon in my boot, could
I come but to use it; I might gain my freedom by this strife. -- It Is done, now
I am free; But 'ere it is known, let me get within reach of them; Hold, as you
are Soldiers, hold, do not strive for trifles at the rate of lives too


Stand you off, or I shall spoil your expectation; You had hope a good from
this, but you are cozened: keep off, or I shall find a spare thrust shall do
your business


For wishing your good?


A pox on your Charity and your baubles; I would you been both hanged when I
met with you; the Rogue has hurt me


If that Villain scapes me I am strangely cozened.


I am wounded too, will you divide yet? And not let him laugh at both; he is
like to be our Heir and Executor if we agree not


I am content; We are Friends, and thou shall have half; Here Is my Hand, and
let us dispatch him. -- Oh, he has killed me


Ye gods, that thus have armed in defense of my Innocence, to you I acknowledge
this strange deliverance; I am free, but whither to go to keep that liberty,
you that miraculously have sent it direct me too; I would find Phillora, but I
know not where to seek her known and pursued in this habit, though not for the
Prince, yet as an Enemy, will be dangerous. -- ha! see what fate presents in
this Extremity; it is a Perriwig, why not use it, and change habits with this
Soldier, and so attempt to pass as one of them? it must be so, my wounds will
be my excuse too, for being behind my Fellows; Thus, like an Enemy to my self
I Will prove a Friend, and from these bitter flowers this honey gather; and by
Fortune made equal to my love, safely enjoy the conversation of that maid, in
this private habit, which was refused as Prince, when fortune frowned. -- I
start not at this misery at all; nor will I


GOod heaven, what a day was this! My soul trembles to retain the sadness in my
thoughts; the cries and groans still fill my Ears, The wounds and death that
lies in thousand places are still before my eyes; The horror of so many kinds
of Entrances for death makes my soul sad, to think any man can be proud of
conquest when they consider at what a Rate of misery and Cruelty it is
purchased; Oh Fidelia, the sad means and Lamentations that the deceived hopes
will breed from the fate of this day! -- slaughter yet flying over the Field,
waited on by death, who visits the Innocent, the Coward and the valiant, none
can refuse him. Yet nothing is fuller of wonder then mine own part, who, this
day, the thought of a friends danger would have begot a tear from, yet now am
forced to tread upon the blood, and suck in at my Nostrils the souls of
wretched men, whose last thick breath has filled the Air


Pray, Madam, cease to weep, and employ all your patience to resist the
violence of this storm; your Innocence will save us all


Oh Fidelia, This horror, nor the diverse dangers of the times, is the load my
soul shrinks under; it is the loss of my Royal Father, and poor Leopoldo, that
bows me to the Earth; yet, in midst of these miseries and fears my eyes abuse
me, if I saw not this day in the battle that fatal Figure my dreams have thus
long conversed withal


'Twas sure the same the Prince met this morning.


No, no, I saw her too; this was not unlike her, in habit, I confess I have
labored with my grief, and the weakness of my Sex, thus far, to see if fate
would guide me once more to his sight


I pray be pleased, Madam, to repose here, whilst Arcus and myself see what
horse those were that entered the wood


If there be in nature such a blessing as you imagine, I shall yet smile; for
my heart tells me his sight concludes our miseries; yet what can be stranger
then the things we have seen and suffered this day? how our fears have
reconciled us even to this habit


We have not leisure to consider those lesser things now; Yesterday I should
have blushed to let Fidelia see what is now exposed to the view of dommon men;
Behold the power of Parents, whose command hides all, and my obedience is as
modest as my Coats; but when I consider my mind, and what fate imposes upon me,
thus to pursue a flying shadow, ye gods behold, and pity a Virgin wooing, and a
Virgin armed; stranger things then these no maidens fortunes know; Yet if I
should see him, I can do any thing sooner then tell him that I love (and that
too I fear) sooner then leave to do so


From one that has felt the same sting pray take a little counsel, and resolve
not what you will do, or say, until you see him; for to hope to be wise, thus
far before, in business of Love, is Madness; The heart only prepares love a
perfect well-come; They are too much themselves that can speak sense; at such a
time your worst Lover will tell his Tale best


No more, no more, it is a Riddle, all; The wise man is not sure to read it, nor
is it impossible to the Fool


I am yet afraid we are not safe: for the Enemy pursues us in all places, and
therefore let us retreat into this wood; yet whither should we fly but from our
selves, that carry our griefs along with us


This sword too, if all feared it as I do, though by mine own side, Repehtance
cannot make this day so Innocent as my fears would have preserved it; Behold ye
powers, A maid, whose feeble prayers could not reach your throne, thus upbraids
ye; and as a more powerful weapon draws her Sword; your anger thus has armed
our Sex, which has still been taught, Maids can so little glory gain in fights,
that they can scarce be modestly angry


Treacherous and Injurious men give us a dispensation; and nothing is more
lawful nor modest then those wounds a Virgin gives in defense of her Honor


Alas, Fidelia, armed women have as far out-shot their mark as cowardly men
fall short of theirs; fighting women can add so little to their Fame
themselves, that it is scarce for their honor to be sought for; and if men
cannot add to women's fame by fighting, (which is their Idol virtue,) sure we
catch at Shadows when we draw their Swords: and to speak really, that woman's
honor that must be held by a Sword is not worth a Swords cure; For who has
once been doubted may be innocent, but never fully cleared; for such a doubt,
if it does not stain, yet it dies the minds of the best friends; Men,
reasonable enough, fear there was something called, some looks or words, some
motion, that becken'd him to come, and made her subject to the boldness of that
Sex; some negligence that bad him hope a Surprise, e're the boldest durst
attempt such a fort as a modest mind; if there had not been some intelligence
within, or at least the guards of virtue sleeping, they durst not (I say) hope;
And this is my guilt, who, in my sleeps, have given up that mind and heart to a
shadow, in my Dreams, that waking defended it self against the world; and now
the Conqueror insults


Oh Madam, leave to repine at a Fate you cannot change; but calmly obey the
gods; your virtue was not wont to dispute their wills; Remember, Madam, you
have much to expect from heaven e're


Sure I am not stubborn, Fidelia; Obedience is all I plead; for I am so far
from refusing what they command, that thou see I follow a shadow because
they sent it; and I believe all these desires but so many calls, so many
becknings to come, which I shall cheerfully Obey; I know there must be some
divine providence shut up in that Figure, some hidden secret some knot in fate
that heaven has appointed my mortal hand to untie; It cannot be they should
pick me out of a Nation only to make me miserable; No, no Fidelia, it is but to
make our joys taste the sweeter, that they pass them through these difficulties
and fears


Now I prophecy we shall be happy; and give me leave to say, your former
doubts have been one cause of these sufferings; for to doubt their power or
mercy is the great sin; for when men dare confine the gods to the capacities of
their narrow minds then they cleave the Air with Thunder, and in some high
Example speak their Anger; hark, I hear a noise of weapons, we have talked away
our safety


Haste, haste, Madam, or we are lost; this cursed color of mine is known to be
one that fought on the princes side to day; This brand of shame, not only sent
to be my curse, but yours; fly, and I Will kill my self, and let them believe I
died of wounds in the battle, it is only me, me that they pursue, and what
wretch is he, would live, when he might die, to serve


Hold, Arcus, thy faith shall live to be admired, as I have a life and Honor,
if thou lay'st the least violent hands upon thy self, here I Will stay, and
expect the worst of Fortune


Fly then, for Heavens sake.


We have lost the way, and know not where to go.


Enter this wood, Madam, that though we find not the Prince we may not lose
each other


Innocence! where is thy home? Alas, she has none! Innocence as restless is as
her Servants, sent upon Journyes, as Fortune, or Oppression pleases; no certain
place assigned her, They wander still over the Earth; Courts and Temples are
but Inns to virtue, where she lodges for a Night, but early next day she must
be gone


It Is sad, the while, when the Palaces of Princes, nor Empire (beyond which the
ambitious Sword aspires not) cannot terminate her wandering steps, nor the
Temples Sacred Odours breathe air pure enough for her to live in. But these sad
contemplations are not proper now; leave them, Madam, and seek a safety, for
fear of worse evils then we have yet met


Heaven I obey, and but follow, where thou lead'st the way.


PUrsue them, Roderigo, they hide in every Bush, victory and smiling Fortune
beckens us to come


It Is a sullen kind of Courage that despair and anger gives 'em; they have
defended themselves to this place, with a strange daring, and a kind of miracle
in success


It Is but this desperate handful that remains.


IT is the Princes party that disputes the hill, I saw the slave, I cannot be
mistaken dear Pollidor, I know the Moor; my Imagination, nor my Love, which so
often you have upbraided, cannot change colors, Pollider


See my Reason, Blood, All I have freely given to your Passion; Follow thy
Fate; for since my Father's satisfied, I shall without dispute obey you; though
his news surprise me, being not apt to believe the Prince though he offered
marriage; but heaven has time to punish and reward. -- hark, I hear the noise
of weapons, step into this Wood, and see what it means.


Fly, Madam.


O whither, Fidelia?


See, see the Slave I spoke of, and certain they must be Friends to the Prince.


The odds makes the rest our Enemies, and honor calls Swords to their party.
Stand, What are you


We are two that would fain be Friends to thy Fortune what ere it be. O
Fidelia, this is the same fatal Figure again


The Word?


Bellamira.


Pass that way while we endeavor your safety here.


How they tremble! their fears ly heavy upon them; some secret bosom-sin which
they are loath to part with makes the fear of death worse than death


This way, Fidelia; it is the Deity that in visions made his visits here, I
cannot be mistaken, Love and Fate have stamped the Figure in my virgin-minde,
let us follow and tell him so


Stay, Madam, Whither will your distracted griefs transport you? if you be
discovered you are lost for ever; your Honor too calls you back; when Women
pursue how full of blushes are the most innocent actions


But if he goes ere I speak to him my soul will wither still in the fear that
this should be a Dream too. O Fidelia, it is a cruel Fate that forces me to
these precipices; Is there no possibility to be happy, but we must lose some
grains of our value? Has Honor no Holy Days? Is her service all toil of mind
and body, no reward? Are Chains and Slavery the sole marks she desires to be
known by? All Sting, all Thorns, no Roses, no Flowers, no Honey? Why should Man
endowed with a reasonable mind sacrifice to such an Enemy for such shadows as
these


Alas, Madam, is this a time to dispute the power and will of Heaven? Let us
seek a safety first before new dangers find us


No, Fidelia, I fear no new danger; could I find a cure for this old wound I
would despise all the Conqueror, either with Sword or Chains could bring; Why
should his youth by fate be made so fit for my love, and then be set so far out
of my reach? See how he hunts for honor, how greedy of my dangers, only as
they are glories; for he knows not me; his gentle Sister too faithful by his
side without fear of wounds seeks them with more fury than we tremble at the
thought, and gives the lie to all that we have said this day, giving and
receiving wounds; Yet a Virgin, in whom no stains nor blush can dwell; What
would these two have been? What stories would they have made if Fate had set
them free, unfettered into the world! What parts would they have acted, had not
these Minds been hedged in and confined with private births! Had not that cloud
hung over 'em, who could have beheld the brightness of that Virtue which shines
through their humble Fortune? And since my Dreams were not safe from his shadow
only, what would the real Figure do? Oh Fidelia


Why these tears? Why this grief, when you ought to rejoice? This day has
removed a seven years doubt, the fears of an Age are blown over in this one
object; That 'twas a shadow is now removed; there rests only fitness now to
complete your happiness; Heretofore you were to wish a being to your Love; now
when your great Heart can descend to meet a private virtue your may be happy.
Remember, Madam, your Dream, and how strange a cure was appointed to heal this
troubled Age, the marrying of a Tree; and see the sacred plants, the health and
wealth of the Forest, designed for that great work


To Love and Fate I bow; and what they shall appoint most readily I shall
submit to


The night will suddenly join in our security; This way, Madam, we must expect
the faithful Arcus


THis Girls passion makes my life a burden to me; but for love of her that is
dearer than my self this Sword should with a kind wound release me, that I
should see her dote upon the Son of him that ruined us, my self too hunting
their dangers, and in our blood write our selves Friends to what we hate --
What have we here? a poor youth slain, and a Picture by him, of his What is
your will? Why this strange way to new miseries? What kind of Curse is this
you have sent me? it is the sacred Figure sure of some Deity profaned and
ravished by this Wretch, whose Sacrilege has from Heaven met a punishment -- O
speak, speak, divine Spirit, command me and I Will revenge thee. 'I will not
speak, it is some Witchcraft sure -- I Will fly and call help from Heaven -- What
is it that pulls me back? I feel something oppress my breast, Phillora's love,
thus she described him. O thou art a Prophetess, I fain would go, but without
this strange new acquaintance my heart says no


'Twas the same my heart told me, I knew the Moor; O Pollidor, this was
fortunate; to rescue the Princes Friends, he minds me not. Pollidor, Brother,
what is that his eyes are fixed upon? a Picture -- Pollidor, Brother! Heaven,
what ails he? It Is a Picture, and of a lively form, divinely graced. Do, start,
and sigh, and -- Pollidor, what, talking to thy self?


Phillora, Sister.


Never cast this from you, in vain thou think to be rid of it; a cunning and
a great Master has graved it with a powerful hand in thy heart, try thy
Philosophy now, forget her, Pollidor; See what Lethe can prevail; haste to
Ga^etta; try if some new Figure, some fresh object can relieve thy mind; Does
Pollidor now begin to find there was something like Reason I said to day; O
Pollidor, I was thy wonder to day, but thou will be mine to morrow, and thy own
for ever


Enough, enough, Phillora, unless thy heart hunt revenge; remember 'twas but
mistaken kindness; I then was a stranger to love, and therefore ought to be
forgiven if I mistook thy passion; but what can thou plead, after having made
acquaintance with the God, if thou despise his Priest? Have but patience, and
thou shall reap all thy revenge, and with innocence of thy heart be pleased
with it, and see thy Brother miserable even to pity


No, Pollidor, it is far from me to seek Revenge against thee; yet I must
confess I cannot be sorry to see thee a Lover, 'twill polish thy heart; 'twas
too harsh, too severe before, a knotty roughness hid much of that beauty which
now will shine when this passion shall illustrate it; Love will weed thy mind,
and prune all that barbarous wildness that wanted sense for others pains; and
thenthy awaked honor and armed thoughts will defend Love and thee against the
world, and make thee, if it were possible, more welcome to Phillora


Come near Phillora; Does not thy heart find a decay of my love? Have thou not
mist, this hour, the diligent mind that was employed, solicitous for thy good
only


Not I, me thinks Pollidor is as kind as ever, and much more lovely in this
passion than in all the reason thou were so proud of


Why then I fear, -- she, this divine figure remains alone


No more, no more; let us first attend our safety, and at leisure seek a remedy
for this ill, the Enemy pursues us close


Tell not me of safety, an Enemy at my foot is not so pleasing a sight as this;
though it be full of despair, it is a poisonous fire, Phillora, that is crept in
at my eyes, it burns here, and the pain is beyond that which Poets describe
Lust, Ambition, or Famine by. Yet my vain heart would fain promise it self
something of happiness and pleasure from this strange thing. Victory nor
Conquest is not half so welcome to my heart as this object; no such music as
the harmony of this face; it has smoothed my brow, and calmed my heart; all
forms of past affection, either of love or hate, are cancelled, all the
impressions of former joy or anger one sight of this has destroyed; those eyes
have even melted my soul, and Pollidor lies ready to receive what form she will
impose


The Gods have heard my prayers since Pollidor is become a Lover, and I shall
now hope my words will again be Reason


I love thee, Phillora, but thou art not half so handsome as this; Prithee do
not leave me, lest I forget thee and my self too: for all the world will vanish
from my mind beholding this; I have already lost my anger, and can forgive
Leopoldo and the King, so she will but smile. O that the divine hand that framed
thee had but given thee a tongue too; it is all thou want to beget a worship,
yet we'll carry it home, and set it upon Diana's Altar


All but Sacrilege I Will join in; take heed, Pollidor, how you incense the
greater Deity; remember how the youthful God has revenged himself, remember; I
say, and tremble


It cannot be they should be true gods; flies play with 'em and worms destroy
them; when they fall we are fain to raise them; I cannot worship my own
creature, it is a contradiction to make my god; but suppose what thou believe,
would Pallas, Uenus, Juno, Minerva, or the rest of that glorious number, affect
such odd poor forms as we adore at home, and give to a mortal this divine
frame? See, see if there be not mercy in her eyes, calm peace in that brow,
innocence and justice in those fair hands; is there grace that men could wish,
or women envy, that grows not in this face; is it not one it self, or rather
all the Graces? and therefore kneel. -- Thou Phillora, here lay thy hand upon
this Virgin turfe, which never crooked Plow deflowred, and by you chaste
spring, whose sacred streams with fruitful embraces circles you flowery Meads,
never to worship any other of her sex, nor shall any but our selves have leave
to sacrifice, lest we pollute her shrine with common vows, which I know will
displease her, for she cannot be thus excellent but she must be particular, and
constant too; for constancy and particularity show the minds chastity; every
froward Girl taught by custom can keep her body chaste, but the mind is seldom
so: vanity, Phillora, has a thousand ways to tempt a woman's mind, and nothing
like love and honor guard it


Should I now be as deaf to your reason as you were to mine, and deny all those
truths of Love and Honor; what could Pollidor say when he should see me dote
upon another face, and forget the Prince


I Would say a woman that out-lives her love has outlived her honor, and is from
that minute to be esteemed but as her carcass, and the moving figure of such a
perjured woman but the shadow of what she was, which some licensed Demon has
usurped to dispatch his business here on earth in; and such a looseness stains
both the fame and figure, the guilt will cast such a poisonous stench that ages
cannot waste it; like treason it taints the blood, the grave cannot hide the
deformity; a broken heart will out-last the Marble or the Epitaph


From thee I Will learn to love, be thou my guide; while thy great heart leads
the way, who follows thee and Love can never stray


No Phillora, if I dye ere I see the substance of this shadow, I conjure thee
bury me in this fatal place; and on my Tomb engrave my fate, that the world may
know here was enterr'd the betwitch'd Forester; this was he that equaled
Echo, and rivaled Narcissus, unless that goddess (who ere she were) that
listened to Pigmaleons tears, would now look down on wretched Pollidor, and lend
a life to this beloved shadow; Love let it be thy act, then find thy eyes, that
with one sight of her I might pay thy bounty; but then take heed thy youthful
deity does not become my Rival, as she has done the gods in worship


This deliverance had all the favorable gods to friend; my disguise will hide
me from the curious eye of all, since it is too poor and low to call the search
of jealousy or envy upon me; but to think of saving my self till I know what
fortune is befallen Phillora is a thought I cannot let enter my heart, possessed
with care and fear for her. -- Ha! it is she; what sight is this? a man in her
arms!


Oh my Pollidor, keep it as the treasure of thy life; it is a jewel I would not
part with for the world, the gods have sent it, keep it and love it; and now
pursue thy fate, and heaven witness how much I love and pity Pollidor


Ha! my heart! what do I hear and see?


Keep it? yes, as I would my Reason or my Soul; this shall be my Buckler
against all but thy fair self, whose friendship I Will prefer before Empire; and
if thou smilest Fortune has no sting: these two lessons I have quickly learned,
Phillora, the unfortunate, and the Lover; and they are two parts, if thou
frown, that I must act for ever. -- Love, thy Army would be numerous, could
thou


It Is her picture, she has given it him; my soul is on fire; and though I
cannot hope to enjoy my love, my revenge is still in my power


Villain, restore it; restore it upon thy life, and quickly.


What art thou? why do thou commit this outrage? who sent thee? why do thou
pursue him, and not regard my words


Let me kill the villain.


The villain will not be killed, Sir.


Hold, fond wretch; though that Jewel be by him prized above his life, consider
what a vain thing it is in thee for a shadow thou know not thus to sacrifice
thy self, and hazard the becoming one amongst the shadows; why do thou frown
upon him, and look with rage on one thou know not? what, is it for
avarice thou would have it? deliver it, and take a better value then thy
poor hopes can promise


Dear Phillora, cease to sue to the villain, let me come; Death, do thou
think I shall not win when I play this game; where will thou venture my sword
if I lose her


I do not doubt thy success, but it is base for both of us to destroy him; and
my love for Phollidor is such, I will not see him hazard that rich heart
against a common sword


False and cruel.


Besides, it is some poor Soldier of the enemy, whose wants have engaged him,
and for a reward he will restore it


No, fond Girl; I Will give thee my part of the earth first, and the short span
of days the gods have left here I Will waste ere that villain shall boast his
victory over my Master that sent me hither


Thy Master? who is thy Master? who sent thee?


Love and Fortune, blind Guides I fear.


What Is thy business hither; for heavens sake unriddle thy anger, speak; what
would thou have


And speak quickly.


From the Prince Leopoldo, who now lies weeping out his drops of life in red
tears on yonder hill; and even with his last breath mourns the loss of thee, if
thou be'st Phillora, calling on thy name; for love of whom, slowly and
unwillingly, he becomes a star, that art giving away thy self into another
arms


The Prince Leopoldo dye! oh where! guide my desperate feet to that sad place,
and thou shall see how vain his fears are by the haste this heart will make to
meet him; for charities sake, for the Princes sake, upon my knees I beg,
restore his Picture, and let us go


What should I believe?


What villain gave the Prince his wounds? could he look upon him and strike?


False and fair have a thousand ways to kill; and there is more danger to
Leopoldo in those eyes then in his sword; whose frowns nor anger have any
terror, it is an idle rage; and thy passion only dangerous to thy self


Death, shall I be injured and despised too? sure I am not so weak an enemy as
to be beat with words


Oh my fate, Fortune I defy thee now; do thou grudge me the mourning for the
Prince


Dog, treacherous dog, this odds made thee so brave.


See, Sir, here are two of those that rescued the Princess Bellamira, who in
boys habit we surprised, together with Arcus the Moor


And what are these?


We are nothing, at least not worth telling now, ask thy self what we are;
foolish fortune has given thee the power of disposing fools we are that might
have looked on and would not, and now pay for playing others Cards


It Is yet my joy I served the Prince, and saved his Sister; and know, Tyrant,
if my faithful heart could redeem him, I could know no misery after it


What is he there?


A villain, one of thy own train; but had not her fond pity saved him, I had
paid his score


You took one prisoner before from me; but ere you get loose your self you
shall pay both scores


Roderigo, did ever see a more graceful couple; there is something of
greatness in their looks I have not seen in persons of their rank. Prithee
answer me calmly; what ye are this habit speaks you are no Soldiers


The unhappy issue of one chaste bed, the children of a poor Forester bred and
born in these woods, led to this fatal day by chance, and kindness to this
luckless Girl, who till this hour has always been all my care; but love,
curious love has found my mind business of its own


Ha! what do I hear, Brother to my Love, and I wretched villain have ruined
them


Convey them safe to Capua.


Yes, Sir; we'll see them safe, I warrant you. -- Something I must do like an
enemy until I can prove a friend, this day's full of fate. -- Come Sir, will
you march? -- Had not my jealousy blinded me I might have seen a Brother in
his face, and the fatal figure in my Sisters Dream


At last the cloud's dispersed; and now we may see clear, free and round about a
full victory, such a sullen game I never played, and had they been of one mind,
this had proved a black day


How I abhor the very victory treason brings us!


If Bellamira had not escaped, the whole work had here found an end; but if
that scornful fair one fall into my hands she shall see how I can act her part,
whom my anger and revenge pursues more now then my love did heretofore


Your Highness is in passion, else this anger to a Lady of her birth and virtue
is so unlike the rest of your character, I am confident you would not own it;
for to me she stands much greater in esteem for that answer, then if she had
shrunk with her fears and


All these Arguments are against her; for she saw my kindness such, as when she
was fallen into my power I offered from being a Subject to make her a Queen


Subject? Sir, that is beyond your contract to make any of this Nation your
Subjects


Is it beyond the sword, Clytus? I know no other Law nor Contract.


Yes; and now in your greatest glory I dare tell you so; And know, there is not
a man amongst us, but will fall upon those swords you owe this victory to, ere
yield themselves your Subjects; You will find Naples scorns to acknowledge any
other King then their own: And here, in the name of all those that sent me,
whose Loyalty sixteen years banishment and oppression could not weary, no nor
the virtue of those most generous Princes Bellamira, and Leopoldo; whose
miseries though we lament, yet they had not power to seduce our Loyalties;
therefore do not hope to fright us into slavery


Clytus, you are in Passion, and too sudden with the Prince, and your fears
most unreasonable


That. Your answer will clear; Know, in the Name of them whose General I here
stand, I again require performance of conditions. In the first place, the
delivery of all prisoners into my hands; Then, that this night our young King
be produced and crowned; which Ceremony being past, your Highness will please
to Command your Army to retire toward Calabria; where, with all convenience
which we shall provide, they may pass for Sicily; and according to conditions
leave to us our King and the quiet possession of all those Dominions, that
belonged to his Royal Father, the unfortunate Ortho; Sicily being by us
abandoned to your Highness as 'twas agreed; though I confess my Heart bleeds to
think our ills had no other remedy, nor this diseased State could admit of no
gentler cure then the hewing off these branches, as Leopoldo and Bellamira,
from the royal stock to save the Tree


Clytus, I have stood silent long, and wonder rather then Patience bred that
Attention to this new kind of Language from you. Where Is the Oppression,
Treason, and Tyranny; The wrongs to gods and men; where is the usurper against
whom your Flattery and dejected looks and folded Arms? These postures and these
words were Clytus his, when he sought my aid; Clytus, there, strove to persuade
we were appointed by Heaven the scourge of these mischiefs, and made it appear
that Fate had named me in a Dream seven years since to your scornful Princess;
In which I was pointed at, and the whole success of this war most
Prophetically foreseen; How often has thy Flattery called me that stranger that
she saw land in that calm Evening; This, that foreign habit that kicked up the
dust in their faces? And see the King and Prince, all lost in that dust, the
disaffected people. And now I know my strength, and see your Hearts, I will not
march one foot farther, until the Princes and Castles are delivered to me as
rewards of this victory; Nor shall you see your King till I think fit to trust
you, lest he find you as false as I have done; which I shall be yet able to
punish in your greatest Pride and strength; For the Prisoners, poor and
contemptible as they are, (for I know only of two Shep-herds) yet since
demanded thus unhandsomely, not one hair of their heads shall be delivered; nor
dares Clytus fetch them


Either produce the King, and perform the Articles you swore to, or we shall
find a power will be too strong for perjury


Perjury!


Yes, Perjury. -- Death, have we refused the Brother of our King, to be usurped
over and governed by a stranger? No, Leopoldo, if any stranger must be our
Fate, thy Starr shall guide us; whose noble Breast, this day, I robbed of his
honored Order, and forced like a private Soldier to fight for his safety; yet
then, had not thy odds rescued thee, or his noble Mind given a protection, thy
proud Heart had found a Justice some worse Nature must pay; 'Twas he that gave
thee thy Life; that Life thou so insultest with over the ruins of his Father,
which (slave and Villain as I was, to join in laying those sad loads of grief
upon his great Heart) I Will redeem, or die in the attempt, if you delay this
night to produce the King. Your Answer


It Is here, double Traitor; here in this sword, and in


That Traitor, though Truth, shall cost thee dear; Perjured Prince. -- March.


Heaven, thy Hand still! Clytus, my Soul forgives thee; Honest and gallant; and
what I thought crime is but virtue in thee, and loyalty to thy Master; and I Will
find a way to tell thee so if thou persist: This quarrel may give us power to
strike once more for our Revenge; -- Almanzor's full of thoughts; this quarrel
must be fatal, they have both too much Courage to bear such injuries as these


Now, Sir, has your passion had the full swinge are you deep enough in dangers?
Have you Enemies enough? If not, we had best seek for more


It Is better to know, then doubt of a foe; I saw him false from the first hour
he had possession of the Castle; this is but pretense; A few wretched
Prisoners, only a pretense to pick a quarrel now the work's done; It was my
curse to trust a Traitor; yet if we had not mist the Princes the Castles had
been no losses


Sir, it is now no time to talk of why-nots; this night we must expect some
attempt from them, their business is done, the King is slain, the Prince too,
for ought we know, his Clothes and order being found upon the ground; the
people too are armed in their defense, and expect we should produce their King;
which abused hope We cannot expect they should forgive; and we are to believe
this party that have defended themselves thus long against the King will never
yield to our power by any argument but the Sword: Besides, you may gather from
Clytus what the rest intend, whose Forces are drawn apart toward Naples, and
those of Gaietta remain still upon the pass; and can if we oppress them, upon
occasion, retreat or join when it is to ruin us


What Is to be done then? I am all rage; The Villain Clytus has robbed me of all
my hopes


You must resolve to fight with one of them this Evening, whilst divided, else
to morrow 'twill be a double business; if not, march immediately to Capua,
secure the Harbor, and this night dispatch a Galley for Sicily for supplies,
and therein send the prisoners; for I believe them of more worth then they
appear, by the earnest demand of Clytus


Give order then, that we may be ready to march. Fortune, if thou smil'st upon
this Action I shall yet have time enough to make ready a Revenge for the
Villain Clytus; whose falsehood in a fatal hour has thrown me from all my hopes
of Love and victory.


This Clytus shall know.


How now, the news!


Sir, pursuing the Enemy in the wood I have lodged some persons of quality;
who, by their lamentations for the King and Prince Leopoldo, I know must be of
that party; Two of them are remarkable, a Satyr and a Moor


Speak softly, it is they. The Princess Bellamira, I know by that Moor; Roderigo
take a choice party and let us fly to this remedy: Fortune, I no sooner called
upon thy name, but thy kind Deity has sent a medicine for my Mind, a cure for
all my ills; Lead the way, and for this chance thy reward shall exceed thy
hopes; Come, Roderigo, now we may smile again; Bellamira will weigh down the
scales, and make our Revenge full


A few will do it, the quieter the better, for this wood is full of paths and
caves, and there is no hunting of them unless we could do it by the scent like
dogs


Sure some sullen star pursues this girl; I Will follow too, and make it sad to
some


'TWas done like Clytus, and tomorrow we'll second thy words; let the men be
well fed to night, and a Donative distributed for this days service


My Children, Clytus, had they many wounds?


No, nor any dangerous; oppressed with multitude we took them, and they are now
his Prisoners; But this night, I fear, they will be sent away, and the rather
that I was earnest for their delivery; And I believe we are deceived all this
while; for I am confident the delivery or discovery of our young King is beyond
his power, and only a pretense to engage the people


No matter, that pretense has done our work, and now


Calmly, Clytus, and resolved let us proceed: now we have the game in our hands
take heed of rashness or security, which may be as dangerous as his despair;
let us in, and resolve with the King what we shall do, and to whom, e're ye go,
let me present you both; his pardon and blessing will prosper the work. Kings
are their Countries Parents, and heaven never blessed that people whom a good
King cursed


MAdam, we will look out, if you please, and see what we can learn abroad.


She Is lost, she is lost, I Will eat no more; a curse on all their heads that
fetched us from our quiet home. -- Let me go, what Pan I will, you shall not
outlive my Love


Quick and silently into the Cave, for there are some entered the Wood; what
they are I know not


I Will not go in, but stay and tell them where you are, unless you give me my
love, or show me where you have hid her, that I may worship her grave


She Is not dead, man, she is in the Woods only, and to morrow we shall find
'em


To morrow? why it is not night yet; Cramps and Aches find me, and the Murrain
eat my Flocks, if I will eat or sleep till I find her; all Night, and not know
where my Love is


Go in then, and defend these people who thou know she loves, for she will
die if they be hurt


Shall we seek her when we have done? I Will not strike a Dog else.


See they come, defend this pass, and then we will seek her.


Yield, and let me bind thee, or I Will pash thy Scull.


So, so, follow me, and save the Princess; what, art thou lame?


The Rogue has hurt me with this foolish thing; a Bee's sting is worse, and yet
I am lame


NO resistance, but patiently expect what the prince commands, or you are dead.


What Prince, Villain? Either be a friend, or enemy; give us our Freedom, or
with thy Sword perfect that Treachery thou have begun with the worst of
mischiefs; Kill us, any thing rather then be subject to the impious rage of
that insolent Conqueror


Ha, Comrade! where is the Prince? here are two of the birds I promised him, the
rest are flown


They are so, Traitor, that thus art armed with success; stare not, but defend
thy self; Fly, Madam, to any safety; if this service prove successful, thank me
hereafter; if not conceal me, what e're you see me do


Madam? It Is the Princess Bellamira, sure. -- Villain, thou wilt live to repent
this Act


Thou shall not, if I miss not my aim.


Hold, it is enough; my faults are powerful, and Treason alone is weak, I am
lost


This wretch had given up all our hopes to the Invador, had not my fate been
above him


Soldier, which way went Roderigo?


That way in pursuit of the Enemy, -- Why not, in this disguise, strike him
dead and secure all? why not? because it is base, and unworthy of Leopoldo;
treachery has no Argument strong enough to justify it, success cannot do it;
I Will follow him, defy him, and as Leopoldo take a full revenge, or give him a
perfect victory, Leopoldo, stoop to Fortune, War no longer against that froward
Diety, bent to thy ruin; poor Bellamira, something I must do, and by appearing
still a violent enemy may gain a power to serve her; Sir, do you not know this
Prisoner? it is the Princess Bellamira, the same that the Shepherds took from us


It Is not possible, this the modest Princess, fighting in Breeches? sure it is
one of her Pages


What I am is as heaven appoints, who has delivered me over to your barbarous
power; what I was this morning is now no argument, since they are pleased to
withdraw their blessings; yet in all conditions I can despise the insolent
Almanzor, prince only in power, slave of Fortune, blessed by chance, like her
undeserving children, who claim neither by virtue nor merit what they hold


You are angry now, and I laugh; and since you would not be a Queen, try if you
can avoid being a Slave; and all those graces of that Magic form which once I
loved, all those Flowers of Youth and Beauty my hate shall look on, and see
wither in a scorned servitude, under an envious and cruel Mistress, who will
make my love to thee as great an affliction as thy scorn has rendered it my
heart; for she loves as violently as thou hate, to whose revenge I Will give my
interest up


The same impious barbarous Almanzor still, upon whose power I Will look with
scorn, it cannot be long lived; thou art too wicked to be long our Rod; for thy
threats, they move me no more then thy promises; Thou know I would not sell
my honor for the first, nor be frighted from it by the last; for know, when I
will be free, (which yet I will not be) it is not all thy guards can keep me;
and to heighten thy rage, know, it is no cold frozen Nature, no aversion to
Loves gentle passion, makes me despise thee; For never Virgins breast had more
love in it, that had no more honor then Bellamira; and I rejoice to suffer for
thy Rival, and he shall know it, that thy envious soul may gnaw thy heart,
which, if thou love, 'twill do, when thou shall see me die for him that is
overcome, and despise thee though a Conqueror


Away with her to the Castle, and upon your lives secure her, I shall have my
time too; what success, Roderigo?


It Is in vain to hunt them; that Satyr and the Moor are a pair of Devils,
stout, and subtle; I Will not undertake such another chase, for their skins; they
are all flown, but whither I know not; only one boy, I left him crying and
shaking in a bush


That Boy we have, and with him all our hopes; that in Boys habit was the
scornful Bellamira; and now Clytus, and his insolent Abettors will stoop again,
if my heart can be brought to reconcile it self to her, whose injurious words
have again enraged it so that Ambition, Love, nor Interest can scarce make me
dissemble my hatred of her


If you be certain it is the Princess, away with her this night, or with the
morning Flood, for Sicily, together with the rest of your Prisoners; leave me
to make good Capua until I hear from you; besides, when you and they are gone,
they must treat; for to fight signifies nothing; for if they beat us (which is
uncertain too) yet they advance not to their end; for Leopoldo being dead, and
she next Heir, dissemble, flatter, swear you love, any thing to appease her
mind, marry her and confirm your Conquest


It Is resolved this night privately we'll depart, and in the interim order the
affairs here to your direction. -- Dissimulation be thou my Friend while I
banish hence this idle passion Love, and make room for the more noble Ambition,
thou Guide of Princes, Love, that precious nothing, that dear I know not what,
that makes us find a difference between a Mistress and other women. Farewell
for ever blind unbodied Boy, that is proud to become both Poison and Medicine
to the mind, the wounder and the wound, where he can find a faith; else an
indifferent common cheap companion for all (but Death) from King to Beggar; --
Almanzor when ere thou dare appear charmed by my scorn, and this thy perfect
Character; till thou have tamed her mind, and till hers be kind, in spite of
all thy Power or Art, Ambition or Revenge, not Love shall fill my heart


TOo late I find my Error, poisoned with a dangerous passion, Jealousy,
foolishly seeking what it would not find; the Curse of all the Gods are wrapped
in his black thoughts, that yields to that Enemy of man, a Curse both in the
Root and Fruit: First he blinded my Reason, against which Reason he made me
doubt my Love; Then my eyes, which else must have seen a Brother in his face,
and in this cloud made me lose my self; and then to find a new doubt, another
misery. This Picture Picture of my Sister found by him, lost by I know not who,
but given by somebody; I would not doubt Bellamira, yet I am sure it is hers;
neither she nor my eyes are disguised; there is some mystery as well as fate
abroad to day; I Will have patience until I speak with her, nor will I be
discovered until I be satisfied whose this Picture is. But see how my divided
mind forgets her business, and talks away that little time that rests for
their safety; for ere I can pursue my Design, and return from Clytus his
Quarter, (whose faith I now admire and forgive) 'twill be too late to use his
friendship; for the Prince is resolved with his Prisoners this night to escape
for Sicily; nor is there a way left to prevent this mischief, unless I take
advantage of that trust that this Disguise has given me, and privately arm my
friends, so to surprise the Guard and escape to Clytus his Quarter: this is our
last and desperate hope, and this I must put in execution after the enjoying of
some few minutes happiness, thus unknown informing my self of that dear
knowledge my heart labors withal, and this benefit my misery will afford me;
for being thus levelled by fortune I may be just to that excellence my better
days could neither enjoy nor reward without blushing; such and so cruel are the
Laws we our selves are bound to; and though we can give Laws to others, we are
yet Slaves to custom and opinion, condemned to starve our minds upon the
barren heart of some person only great in birth, and forbid to taste the full
blessings this poor Maid is blessed with -- Here they are within this place, the
darkness will assist my Design, in hearing unseen what they say; and when I
will I can by the benefit of this light discover my self


Good Heaven, do I lament any thing of Prison? Is not all the World Prison now,
and a Prison equal to a Throne when he is gone? O Pollidor, he is dead, lost for
ever, for ever, that is the great wound Death gives; let that thought excuse my
immoderate grief, and awake the guilt that has long slept in thy vengeful
mind: Thy Prince is fallen, dead, neglected, and unmourn'd, and thy heart
afflicts it self for a Picture, the lost shadow of thou know not what, while
the best of Princes without a tear from thy eye fills the number, and is by
treacherous odds become a shadow: O ye Gods, why should mankind, wretched
mankind, desire to stay after him, and wither out some few Ages here; why
should the World out-last that gallant Prince, whose death has left it but a
Carcass


Your passion only tells you he is dead, for none saw him fall; it is only in
your fears he is lost, and most unjustly you accuse me now of hate; for though I
loved not the name of Leopoldo, yet Heaven witness I now adore the man


Prithee peace, and let me love once, and but once; even Pollidor can deceive
my heart when the Prince is concerned. Dissembler, my fears and thy wishes are
built upon the same unlucky ground -- See, fond Youth, see the royal
distinction of the brave Leopoldo from other men, behold his ancient Order, the
Chain too Pollidor, Pollidor, that Shrine Murder and Treason have ruined, and
with profane hands thrown down a Temple built by and dedicated to all the Gods


All the Gods forbid.


Now you and my Father may smile, your hatred has found a malicious power to
join with your wishes; try if all your Sacrifices or penitent prayers can make
such a Prince, but I am certain thou have lost a Friend; for do not think it
possible I can be flattered to outlive him? and though I cannot hate thee, I
can hardly forgive thy hatred to the Prince, whom I shall make haste to follow;
Thou art but gone before to prepare the way; nor will I stay here but to
dispatch thy business upon earth, and then Pollidor thou shall see me follow;
but I talk too much, until it be time to justify to the world how much I
loved; here I will mourn my loss till I can find a handsome when, and glorious
how to follow


When that time appears, Pollidor will quit himself of this unkind thought,
and thou shall find me ambitious to have it said, I fell in Leopoldo's cause


Such a Monument, (though I love my Brother) I would live to see thee raise thy
self and the great Leopoldo: And if thou dy'st as handsomely for him as I would
have lived faithful to him, who pities thee, or weeps upon thy Grave, are no
Friends to either: but these are words, and he is dead. Ye Gods, who would have
lost so glorious an Enemy? 'T was worth thy care to have preserved him, though
thou did not love him thou should have kept him for a Pattern, his Virtues
were worth thy Love and Envy; though he were bornn to thy Hate; Now thou have
yielded to his fortune; for though Leopoldo be dead and fallen under thy wish,
not under thy sword, a gallant man would not have lost such an occasion to have
made himself known in his own Revenge: now the world will say, My Brother hated
a Prince he could neither love, imitate, nor overcome


Heaven, can I hear this and not relieve her? I must interrupt this grief, it is
most unjust to let them be miserable for me that am the happiest man that ever
Fortune struck at and mist, How I scorn her poor malice! Prouder of these two
Friends than all those airy gifts she has called back


Who these should be I cannot imagine; that so confidently avow their love and
hate to my Brother; if it be dissembled it is done to the life; it is some
cunning highly wicked, or else the kindest that our party has this day ruined


What Picture's that they rave of? This discourse confounds my thoughts; a
Brother and a Sister; by their discourse she loves the Prince too: I will not
yet be known, perhaps they will be free, and I may know more by chance than by
question what that Picture is, the loss of mine makes these Chains heavy


Madam, start not, I beseech you, nor despise the Proposition


Sure thou art mistaken, do thou not see thy Error?


When it is to serve you, Madam, my confidence I hope will find your pardon,
else, miserable as I am, I would die sooner than betray the divine Bellamira


Speak softly then what it is you design.


First be pleased to know 'twas I redeemed your Highness, the Soldier that
desired to be concealed, which service I should not remember but to beget your
faith. Know the Tyrant boasts your captivity, and vows such miseries as shall
make you proud of his embraces ere he will embrace them; this waked my heart; and
could my single revenge have served you, upon the place I had struck him to the
earth


Sure I dream, whence comes this gentle sound? and how came so much humanity to
get a power in this barbarous place, where Lust, Force, and Treason reigns! How
came thy charity to get admittance hither


Leave to wonder, Madam, and give faith to m^, for our time's short, and it is
not every hour I can serve you in: This night you must prepare to follow my
directions, and attempt your escape; for you are with the morning tide designed
for Sicily, where you must prepare to suffer what the Conqueror shall impose


Wonder not, I prithee, at my want of faith; I have been so little acquainted
with civil language since I came into his power that yours amazes me; I have
this day received nothing but Injuries from Men and Elements, abandoned by all,
and treated as the scandal and infamy of our Sex, like some Vagabond that had
strayed from Honor and Virtue


Give me leave to remove even the greatest of your griefs; the King and Prince
live, I speak a truth as great as your joy; Palantus too is safe, and your
fellow Prisoner here, and those two you heard discourse even now are Friends to
whom your Highness owes much; they are yet but private virtues, but the world
shall know them


Thou art my good Angel sure; May I know who thou art? Certainly I will not
betray thee


Hereafter, Madam, you shall; let but this night pass, and trust me, and Heaven
curse me if I betray you


He sighs, sure he has been miserable himself he is so sensible of mine, and
now some heavy grief hangs upon his heart; I am curious to know what kind of
misery can make this poor Soldier sad


What kind of misery? alas, Madam, miseries have not one sting I have not felt,
and her bitterest roots are now my food. -- Nature cannot be disguised, though
my body be


He weeps; what are the miseries that thus wound thy soul? for tears are her
blood; did thou ever love unfortunately


Never, Madam.


Can thou have wit, courage, kind Nature, and a soft soul, and yet not love?
it is strange that Love and Honor should be strangers; without love all thy
virtues are not thine, they are but Lodgers, Inmate excellencies, and may be
seduced, if not allied to thy heart by Love; therefore leave to hide thy mind
and fortune from me; which I know must have something greater in it then thy
words or condition speaks; dare you venture your life rather then your grief


Take all the secrets of my heart, I love.


How by instinct I found his grief! humanity and civility but guide to Love,
whose paths all that have honor tread


Once, and but once, Madam; and therefore I may say I loved; though my eyes
have much beauty seen written in her best characters, yet in all my days I was
never pleased with more then one story of that fair volumn, and my griefs are
now the fear I should lose the Book ere I have read it out; for I have but
newly begun the History of her face; but I lose time when it is most precious,
because it is yours; for know, Madam, I must retire to the Guard, of which I am
one, but it is to serve you; as soon as I have contrived your safety I shall
give your Highness notice; in the mean time I Will discover, by this light, who
are your fellow prisoners; but pray be pleased to conceal your self till I give
the sign. --


Sure this soul's mistaken; it cannot be such a princely mind should be hid and
buried in a Cottage, nor fate let so much honor grow so near the earth, while
a Prince declines beneath the mean wretch, and becomes a slave to his
passion, and submits to the worst of ills, a barbarous lust, a sin that shame
and repentance attend here, and horror hereafter. --


Ha! it is he, the same Villain that snatched my Picture.


His hated sight brings back my anger; oh that I were free, to revenge the
Prince upon thy sinful head


Good gods, what do I see, protect me heaven; it is the same figure, my heart
fails me, the Shepherdess is there too; Oh Fate, Fate, there is no resisting
thy decrees


Thanks for this friendly light, now I shall know the Authors of that discourse
my soul so much listened to; Ha! it is the young Shepherdess, I Will speak to her,
I Am sure she is a friend. Fellows in misery, and friends to Leopold, such I
know you are by your discourse, and to such the name of Palantus is not
unknown; and gentle Maid, by all thy heart loves best I conjure you tell me
what Picture it is you lament the loss of; for I, wretched I, have this day in
battle lost all my soul doted upon; for my royal Master and his noble Family
are this day ruined, and in this misery I have lost the jewel of my heart;
'twas a Legacy my Master gave me with his dying hands; 'twas a little Picture,
but of the greatest virtue living, if heaven have spared her


Palantus nor his Master I know not, nor his Picture; but if 'twere that I
found to day in the Wood, heaven and earth should meet e're I Would part with it
to any hand, but death's; his cold Commission should only force it


It Is rudely answered, yet if there were no other difficulty in regaining it
then thy barbarous mind can oppose


You promise your self too fast the victory over him that would complain
neither of you nor fortune, if he lost it when the sword could win it


Prithee, who art thou that talk thus in chains?


One that neither knows nor fears thee; one that will neither do nor take an
injury


Prithee, who art thou?


No more nor less then thou art, an honest man.


I Will inform thee what he is; we are two Plants that grew together from the
same root in these peaceful Woods; we are two that till this day never saw an
enemy; but who can be friends to those that hate the Prince, whose cause drew
our swords? and though we be crushed thus with thy Masters ruin; yet I wish
there were no more danger in either of your fortunes then you two will bring
upon each other. For know, Palantus, thy faith to thy dead Master is admired by
all; but none values it more then Phillora, a name yet a stranger to thee and
the world, being sprung this day in blood; know it is the same unfortunate Girl
thou saw this day in the Forest; and this whom thou threatnest is my
Brother; what he and I have done this day to appear friends to those royal
names, Leopoldo and Bellamira, is not unknown, though yet never blessed with one
sight of them but in their miseries, which are but the ashes of his greatness;
let not then a shadow divide such friends; though my Brother love the Picture,
yet he has justice as well as love


Gentle Maid, forgive the passion my love and misery begot; and to you, Sir,
the ignorance of whom I answered will excuse the wildness of my words; pray let
us calmly inquire by what accident your Brother came to find and lose that
Picture, by which I can easily collect whether it be mine or no


Pray describe yours, that will inform us.


Mine was in a box of gold, enameled with Phillamorte and black (the sad
colors that are worn by me forlorn) the Cipher two xx crossed, within a figure
of an armed Pallas; the hair brown, the forehead calm and full of peace; Juno's
eyes, fair and full of mercy; but I want Poetry to express her beauty, to which
the gods have give a mind equal to all she bows to


It Is the same my Brother found in the Wood, and that barbarous person there
snatched it from him; and e're we could regain it again the enemy surpised us


Which is he?


That, there he stands; but if ere I get a freedom I Will make thee repent it at
as sad a rate as I lament the loss now


Villain, restore my Picture, or thou wilt find my chains too weak to hold me
from thy throat; it is the same, now I see him I know the Perriwig and clothes


You wrong me, I never took it from you, nor ever saw you before.


Villain and Traitor, thou lie; and were I loose I Would make thee acknowledge
it in thy hearts blood; I would I could look the slave dead


You are angry, and I must laugh at it; look here is the Picture you have lost;
I have it and I will keep it


Thou dare as soon drink poison; and as safe either of you may do it when I
am free


No more of this rage; cease to injure a man you know not, and despise not a
man you have never proved; your loves are nobler far then your hatreds can be;
your love has a gallant cause, your hatred a mere imagined one; for a painted
Card the curious thieft of an Artist's eye; besides, we know Pallantus dares as
much as any man; and therefore he should not talk; and all honest men dare any
thing that is just; and he that will more then is just is a bolder man then
Pollidor


Excellent Maid.


Forgive me gentle Maid, and I have done; and now I turn to thee, and calmly I
conjure thee by a Soldiers honor, give it the person thou took'st it from


Neither of your two threats nor prayers shall force it from me; yet such a
power those eyes have over me, that you shall command it for one kiss of your
fair hand; dispose of it as you please; and let me stand the fury of their
displeasure


Gentle Soldier, give it to my Brother; thou took'st it from him, and with it
all his peace of mind; justice is on his side, for I saw thee snatch it from
him


There, dispose of it as you please.


Oh, for an hours freedom, and a sword to dispute this right.


You shall have both, Sir; and be ashamed of your threats too ere long; fear
not, I have laid up your lie for you


It Is the same; look Phillora, here is our better Angel come again; so, now I
defy Fortune and all her falsehood; frown on, here is my peace which I Will not
give for all thy smiles; how I love my eyes now, better then I did my hands
before! they faithfully held their hold, while these like cowards let thee go;
it is the noblest sense of any, and informs the knowing soul, makes acquaintance
betwixt us and the great works of heaven, and obliges our hearts more then all
the rest; see how it feasts my mind with these thin colors only! how graceful
too the eye is! what it borrows the tongue and heart pays; how just and
innocent the eye is! it never wrongs in conversation, nor withers one flower in
this Garden; she fills her self, and yet leaves no one beauty less for her
delight: Now, Phillora, my soul feeds upon this divine object, and yet neither
stains nor begets a blush; but, oh my fears! who can this be? that thought lies
heavy upon my soul, and when it is known how to be won; were she to be fought
for, I would not doubt my fate; but this gentle sex must be persuaded and
flatte^'d from their freedom; and for me, a rude Woodman, bred in these
Forests, where shall I find soft words to speak my griefs, and rock her gentle
mind a sleep; while her soul listens to the story of my Love and misery; rough
as my life I fear she will think my nature too, and tremble at the thought of our
conversation, and fly my embraces


No, Pollidor, these are not thy faults; Pollidor was never barbarous, rough
and cruel are not Pollidor's crimes; that that stains thy heart was want of
love; who else might promise to himself success in all that honor can be
engaged in: be therefore a Lover, and that powerful deity will teach thee how
to conquer all those doubts


Be a Lover! how like a young Lover thou speak! can all that would be
Lovers? no Phillora, Love puts nothing to the question that God moves in
commands; why else does this shadow bind me? which I can thus throw from me;
but how can I remove that that is figured in my mind? no, no; I may snarle and
be angry, like a Wolf in the toil, but it is too late; the Hunter's come, and I
am now his prey; yet if I could but know who I love, and see it possible to be
believed how much I love, I should not repine at the price I pay for her faith:
But alas! I catch at air, and my love is spent on shadows; and when I find it
more real I fear my despair must increase too; for if she be mortal she is some
eminent person sure, and where shall I compass proud titles to heap upon her,
to raise her name above the people, to please her vanity, when they shall
wonder and reverence as she passes by? where is that wealth and jewels whose
envied worth and charming beauty may affect and emulate her bright eyes? had I
a Scepter, whose power (like Leopoldo) I might throw at her feet, and like him
to Phillora by such a service speak my love, then I might hope: but alas! all I
have to plead is love; and all I can do for her is to love her; and what is
that to her? when I shall urge it, she will say, who does not? what then is my
love in order to my happiness, till she loves too, but idle air, lost and
forgot like the found that breathed it


What is love? why, it is sent thy punishment; a revenge that his Deity has
taken for being so cruel to my passion; and see if thou have not already
forgotten my griefs, negligent of the misery I suffer for fear of the Princes
danger, only mindful of thy own pleasure; and can thou (unkind) hope I should
join in thy loy, while thou art so negligent of my sadness? no Pollidor, first
thou shall taste my grief; what if she be dead thou love


Ha! what have thou said?


Dead, as Leopoldo, fallen under some wicked hatred. Suppose murder and
treason tearing in pieces that noble form, and Pollidor looking on, held back
by a Sisters envy only; what thinks Pollidor, could my reason hold him? could
he be persuaded to look on, and not draw his sword to rescue her? thou art
silent now, this was thy Sisters case to day, when thou, unkind, refused'st to
lend a hand, or suffer me to go to serve the Prince; and see how the gods have
revenged my quarrel; and thou that could not be persuaded to love the best of
things, Leopoldo, now dot'st upon the least of things, a shadow of thou know
not whom, who perhaps is dead for love of another


Dead! oh Phillora, that doubt has struck me to the soul; pale horror fills my
mind; the tapers of my eyes grow dark; struck with that fear they grow drowsy.
-- If thou be'st


Who this should be that thus in shadows walks, and wounds the hearts of men, I
cannot guess that know none but my self of all our sex; nor will not doubt my
Brothers fortune if she grow not without the reach of honor; but if thy star
be placed in a region as high as mine, then we'll sigh, and mourn, and dye, and
leave to the world the sad story of our Tragedy


Alas Phillora, death is the only thing that an honest man ought not to fear;
nor did I ever apprehend him; but in the persons of them I loved their dangers
make him dreadful; it is not these chains, nor thus to be lost in a crowd, or
buried in a dungeon, frights me; it is fear of this and thy fate that wounds me;
for I am certain we cannot dye forgotten, we are not worse then Plants. Shall I
believe Phillora and Pollidor can when they perish become less then Herbs and
Roots? they by dying lose neither kind nor virtue; nay the ashes of some
things my Father says are medicinable; and death sure cannot so quench fame or
virtue, but some that have virtuous minds will preserve our story, whose
fortune will find pity, though there be few to imitate


Yet my Soul is sick with thoughts that we must languish and wither here, then
die oppressed in the dark, and go I know not whither; and if not forgotten our
selves, yet ignorant of what Fates our Friends suffer; These, Pollidor, are the
bitter wounds that strike before death, and wound deeper then death it self


It Is he, but how to believe him or Fate I know not; one of the two deceive me;
seven years I have loved his shadow, and now no sooner find him but he is lost
beyond redemption; his shadow nor his obscure birth are not so impossible to my
Fate,


No, Phillora, all other thoughts have given place to this great one; this
dear object of mine Eyes and Heart I cannot part with, nor divide from my
Mind; Phillora was, but this is now her business; A thousand kisses I Will give
each day to this pale shrine,


Hold, as thou have Honor, hold; and profane not that picture with thy Lips;
all but that I can suffer, till kinder Fate will give me leave to dispute my
right


Not kiss it for fear of thee? Yes, and die upon it.


You will, wretch? I shall make thee live to know that Princess is to be
kneeled to, and not be approached but with sacrifice of thy life; For know, (to
thy despair) it is the Princess Bellamira's picture that thy lustful Lips have
thus profaned


aside. Ha! what says he? my Picture!


Does your Soul shrink at the name of her? Wretch,


The Princess Bellamira! Oh Pollidor, our Fates are akin still; and it is my joy
we fell from a height fit for Princes to aspire unto: Great and noble (though
unhappy) were our Loves; But if she be that gallant person Fame speaks her, how
came you by her Picture? Palantus is her Subject as well as Pollidor, and all
such are set at equal distances in Honor; Any thing that is a Gentleman is as
near this hope as Palantus; Did she give you this Picture


She give it me! no, fond Girl; she has a Soul of another temper, it is a Jewel
of a double value as it is hers; the greatest wealth of my Heart that never
loved ought but her, though I never yet durst tell her so: But with care and
fear kept diligent watch to hide my passion, as thy fond Brother has done to
publish his


If she did not give it, by what right can you pretend to it more then my
Brother


By my Royal Masters Bounty; who this day when he fell in my arms (full of age
and wounds) from his Breast he plucked that Jewel and gave it me, with his
commands to wear it as his last favor, a present fit for my hopes, that never
durst aim at more then her shadow, too well acquainted with her generous Mind;
whose royal branches will never bear such low fruit as my Love that was born
her slave. Her Brother too, (to whom thou have avowed hate) my God-like Master;
A Prince whose great Soul has still been my pattern, and I must die ere I can
imitate; whose kindness still kept me warm in my Royal Masters bosom, and
honored me with his trusts too; His Mind never stayn'd with jealous thoughts
of my greatness with the King, which are the great ties upon my Heart, not to
abuse their favor as the ungrateful, ambitious pretentions of a slave; But
here my Breast has worn in secret that fire whose grief was known only to one
as unhappy as my self, whom I lament no less then I love the other. --


It Is Truth he says, my Heart condemns me. Here, Soldier, prithee carry it to
him, not for fear of thee, but her;


Now can I scarce resolve to take it, his Heart has high sense of Honor; How
rude, and how calm, in one minute! would I had some of that power again that I
lost this day but to serve thee with, that all the world might wonder at the
Friendship of us Rivals in a desperate Love


Oh Phillora, thou sett'st out first, but I shall overtake thee, if not
overrun thee; for my Heart is wounded, I hope, to death, with this new kind of
grief


If we outlive this misfortune thou shall be my friend; the Brother that lay
in the same womb with me shall not be preferred before thee


Heaven! thy hand is working, and as invincibly as fatally.


Oh Pollidor, dear as my Souls bliss, leave to stab my Heart with these
desperate groans; Look up, or else farewell; do not think to go and leave me
behind; We are both miserable, the same cause too, and all our joys were of
kin; we are allied in our miseries too, and we will die Brother and Sister; I
am now collected, and can chide that passion that accused thee even now, and
thus kiss those Eyes whose dear light is my Hearts fire; Oh Pollidor, thy tears
have mortal poison in them, Farewell; The gods call, and by a thousand ways
becken us to come; and to refuse their summons would look rude in us that have
Honor and Peace of Mind gone before to make our way. Oh Pollidor, we must
part, forced by a sullen Fate, and broken heart; Love, and the Prince, give
fatal wounds


Phillora! Sister! Oh ye gods, spare this poor Girl, and take a stubborn
heart; Oh, she is gone! help, as you have charity, some water, fetch some water


Heaven, and all good things forbid this early mourning for such virtue in the
bud; unkind frost, to nip so soon the fairest Rose that Nature ever boasted.
Art, thy Envy has destroyed her, because thou could not imitate her
Excellency. She breathes; Oh look up, gentle Phillora, and hear thy Prince
conjure thy Soul; if Love be her errand, bid her stay; Leopoldo, thy Leopoldo
calls her back; for if thou dyest thou have lost thy way, and to find Leopoldo,
stay


Leopoldo!


Yes, Shep-herd, Leopoldo.


Leopoldo! Sure I heard that name; that voice had a power to call me from my
Grave; But why does Pollidor abuse his Sister, does he take delight to see her
miserable


Hence all thoughts of low fears, this cloud I thus disperse; See, Gentle Maid,
behold thy Leopoldo. -- Oh thou strangely Excellent, above the merit or weak
faith of dull men; whose


It Is he, it is the Prince; Oh let me kneel to you, Sir; why does your noble
heart thus stoop to save a piece of earth, whose infection you ought to shun


See, kind Fortune has thrown me down from that greatness that divided us last,
only to make me capable of thy Friendship now; And when I wish my self greater
then Phillora, may Treason find me; Here is perfect happiness, this is full
joy; for what is joy (gentle Maid) but hope stripped from our fears, that hung
like rags upon them and darkened their Beauties


My Brother! Then the gods are careful of poor Bellamira.


If my Love be welcome here, but thy safety I have no wish in store.


Welcome, Sir, as winters sun, or summers shade, welcome as your own wishes,
welcome as your safety to my Heart, that loves and feared you were betrayed; Oh
give me leave to kneel, and in silence at your feet weep out our joys which
are so surprising I want words to express, and am fain to use these Emblems of
grief (my tears) to utter it


The prince Leopoldo; good heaven where was my mind!


From your Brother I beg forgiveness, for taking his picture; jealous, I
confess, he had too much Interest in the Excellent Phillora; for finding her in
his Arms, the sight blinded me so I could not discern the Brother in his face;
Thus love is pleased to Triumph still in afflicting our minds with unreasonable
hopes, sometimes, and other some with as idle fears. And now, Pallantus, can
you accuse me for having robbed you of your Picture? but I can reconcile all;
for I believe the same Soldiers that took me robbed you, and in the wood
spoiled me of such Jewels as I had about me, for which they quarreled in the
division; The advantage I took hold of, and slew them, and then took one of
their habits to save my self, and serve my friends, which you are; who I must
now acquaint with the happy news; the King lives, found and known most
miraculously by your Father the old Forester, who knew his Signet upon his
finger; the rest Bellamira


The Princess Bellamira! is she a prisoner too?


Dear Bellamira, hide not thy face; let us resolve like our selves, and Act
those decrees with honor, and leave the rest to the gods; for we see how
little we can command our own, or rule others fortunes


This was the Shepherd that rescued me, and saved my brother.


It Is the Princess; then, oh, be dumb, for ever dumb, since thy guilty tongue
has betrayed thy heart. -- Yes, Madam, 'twas my fortune, and the only grace
that she ever showed me, when she gave me power to save the Prince; and if she
will let me die for your Highness, I have all my wishes


I pray, Sir, quarrel not with Fortune; methinks you owe her much, and are
still likely to be in her debt for more


Oh, Madam, upon my knees I fall, and beg a pardon for our unreasonable hatred,
which our Ignorance was only guilty of


Kneel not to me, gentle Phillora, whose friendly heart has Justice to all our
kindness; and if I can live to pay my score to this Company, I shall then die
endebted only to the gods, whose mercy will take our Faith for further Sums


Softly, I pray, lest the busy ear of Jealous mischief (watchful to our
destruction) catch this dear Secret


Pray let me deliver to your Love and Care this Jewel of my life; for know,
Bellamira, I have vowed, (and it is written in Heaven, and here I again confirm
it,) Never to marry any but this Maid; and if fate frown upon that, a strange
curse find me if ever I quit my freedom


Oh hold, Sir, call back that rash vow, and be still worth the love and envy of
all the world


If Phillora says I am happy my joys are current; her stamp only can make them
so, that is my vow; for I will purchase thee at the rate of all things but my
Honor


Why do you vow so rashly, Sir? before you have called your Reason to counsel?
my heart is so much yours it will not consent you wrong your self; and I am so
proud of my Innocence, and real Love to your Highness, that I must not consent
to that vow; For though I am the private Issue of a poor Forester, yet my
heart's too proud to Love every common Virtue; nor is it every Prince that I
could love, nor do I find my mind so subject to the vanity of our Sex, as to be
pleased with their loving me; therefore be pleased to live my Prince, or I
shall die your handmaid, and show my love was greater then my ambition, which
few women arrive at in Story


No more of this kind war now, for heavens sake; Put on your disguise, for fear
we be all lost in your discovery


I shall obey, and so must you, Bellamira; Do you not find something like your
dream, Sister? -- Methinks there is so much fate in these accidents, that we
war with heaven when we dispute them; See thy vision revealed; are we not all
saved by these Foresters? the King lost and found, and these two Cedars of the
Forest, whose fate heaven only knows


Upon my knees, Madam, I restore this jewel; The grief and distraction my soul
was in wounded this day with thousand miseries, will plead, I hope, a pardon
for the fault my Tongue has made in discovery of a Saucy passion; yet I could
wish the whole Kingdom were as guilty as Pallantus, their love would have been
less dangerous then their hate


No, Pallantus, if it be dear to thee, keep it; and value that, as I shall do
thy Friendship; for I have long known thy heart, and shall trust thee hereafter
with the Secrets of mine; my father has found thou art faithful, and grateful;
And all the gods so bless me as I love thee for it, with all that thou can
hope, or I can in honor give; and if I have Interest in Pallantus he will obey
me; What it is I command him Fidelia shall tell him; till then I am silent, and
her love shall speak the rest


Madam, I have much pretense to love; but I shall doubt it, and not hope your
reward, when I shall refuse a ready obedience to all your Commands


Farewell, Phillora, our safety calls me, pray be silent here, when I am gone,
for they are jealous of me already; this night if possible we will make our
escape to Clytus his quarter, of whose heart and faith I am fully satisfied;
The keys are now in my power; and in the dead of night I Will call ye: The word
shall be, Phillora


All the gods protect the Prince.


What do they mean by his figure in a Dream, and point at me, and talk of her
Love? sure I dream; when I have seen the worst of Fortunes, 'Twill always be in
my power to die; there is none so wretched but she can afford him a grave; her
Eyes are fixed upon me


Why does my heart tremble at the sight of him I thus long have desired to see?
why should I apprehend this hour as dangerous? Yet I feel a pain without a
name, a power not known; it is less or more then Love, Yet not arrived at guilt;
it is neither fear, nor desire; why should I blush then to own the Joy and
kindness I have for him


HOw vain and Insolent is man, that dares call these the weaker Sex! when we
consider the Actions of Virtuous Women, the thousand dangers and difficulties
they must pass through e're they arrive at that great name; what patience, what
courage, what reservedness, what silence, what modesty, how quick of sight,
sometimes to apprehend approaching dangers, to shun them, and again not seeming
to see such as meet them in the face, their checkings and forbidings of Nature,
denying, when she calls loudest, and most pleasing to their sense when she
prompts them to be women; Yet we see them many times, in pure sense of their
Honor, deaf, and dumb, and lame, even when wealth, dignity, and beauty, becken
unto them to come; all these, and thousand difficulties more, almost impossible
to our sense (that have taken up a liberty to Act the contrary) they daily
perform, with a watchful diligent virtue, whose generous minds have imposed
these Laws upon themselves, and now those Laws must be obeyed before they can
command a fair name; while vain men assume a Diety, and believe, if they have
Courage they can with their Swords build themselves Trophies. In short, from
these Excellent sufferers within I may conclude, nature, and all good things
ought to be committed by destiny to the care of that soft Sex, who, till they
love, and give themselves away to men, can do nothing little


SO, so, lay down the provisions here; come, Madam, let us retire into this
Rock, until the tide serves, then we shall be called; for we have agreed with
an old Fisherman, an acquaintance of the Satyrs, who for his Masters sake will
safely convey us to some port that is free from the Conquerours power; but we
must lie close till then, for the Enemy are already in the Town, but the height
of the Cliffs, when we have the night to friend, will secure us; under whose
protection we must make our escape, and leave the rest to Fortune


I Will go too, I Will not stay, until I find my gentle Mistress; a curse fall on
his head has frighted my love from her home; the plague of Ambition and cross
love torment him day and night; may his Eyes never shut till I have blessed mine
with a sight of her; I fear she is hurt, my heart aches so; this busy trouble
of my mind was never so unruly as now; it makes me sick, my Spirits grow weary,
I faint to death, a cold sweat and sadness is all over my breast


How lively this poor wretch describes my pain! But die Arcus, and all the
world, e're she knows I have a thought of Love; yet all my resolution cannot
keep me from repining at my fortune, made by nature so opposite to what I love,
and as if designed for miseries her heart is by fate given to a shadow in a
Dream; My first cross lost a friend, dear as my Eyes, whose kindness and faith
but speak that love which his modest Sister could neither tell nor hide:
together our miseries found us, but to this day I could never know his Fortune,
being, by different lots, become the slaves of different Masters, and my heart
apprehends his death; our Country else would ere this have discovered him, our
color in this nation, making us as public as odious; A gallant and a faithful
Servant 'twas as ever prince made a Friendship with; and had not our miseries
struck us in the spring of our design, something worth story might have
befallen us; Curious to see the world our youths ventured into dangers; to
which slavery was our first step; but my fate was not to be satisfied with one
Captivity; not miserable enough she thought, while only my body was in chains,
and therefore sent these that gall my mind; Love, blind partial Love will have
me his prisoner too, only to show the variety of his slaves; Why else did he
throw away a dart upon me, where there is no possibility of being any thing but
his slave? But I am resolved neither my condition nor passion shall be known,
but in my Epitaph; and there, by a silent Lover, I Will stand distinguished from
the crowd of Rivals, which my heart only emulates in worship; but see the fate
of men, the least deserving is most successful; And barbarous Almanzor by an
impious conquest has power to revenge himself, and insult over the miseries of
that Princess; But I am still a wretch to talk while she is in chains; Yet if I
outlive her, let base and ungrateful be writ upon my name; This night I Will
find the proud Conqueror, and print a thousand wounds upon his breast, or fall
a Martyr to those great names, Leopoldo and Bellamira, which, though they were
guests too great for my sad heart to contain, yet their loss is death


Alas, Arcus, we have all the same interest in this general grief; This grief
and common Calamities (like the infected Air) wounds all, to whose dangers I
must add a wound of mine own, and the cure grows still more desperate; I have
lost my friend, the kind and faithful Pallantus is fallen; and I must fear,
though I cannot know, his misery, the uncertainty of whose ill wounds deeper
then any danger that can threaten my self


No more of this imagined danger; but retire, and wisely attend our own
safeties, that we may preserve our selves till we know what fortune has
befallen our great Master; which we cannot hope, unless this Night we make our
escape; within we may resolve what to do


SEnd for Roderigo, put all things in readiness, it is resolved this morning
tide I Will be gone, and with me bear the scornful cause of my affliction; That
blind foolish boy is neither won by reason, Interest, nor flattery, and set
without my Swords reach; he is not to be bribed nor won by sacrifice neither,
like his friend fortune; some way I must find to reconcile my self to that fond
Diety, or all my hopes are lost


Roderigo, I am thinking. --


Of Love, Sir, I know you were.


Of Love, yes of Love, and sent for --


Me, to inform your Highness of his humor; faith, Sir, I know him as little as
you reverence him; his kinsman, and his mother, I have practiced, (a Bottle,
and a Girl) these kind friends I can serve you in; for the other young
Gentleman, he spoils conversation, and affects corners, either to kiss or cry
in; I hope your Highness is not inclined to that Idle humor; pray will you let
me hear you sigh; upon my Conscience you will make but an ill Lover; I dare
as soon undertake to hedge the Eagle in, as you win the Princess; yet they say
there are as many and certain ways to win a woman, and as many holes into her
heart as there are upon her -- Basta. -- But believe me, Sir, there is one, if
you can hit it, is worth them all


This is a kind of knowledge, Roderigo, that few are ignorant in; but yet let
the god despise me if I fear either of them; and though Poets and Lovers still
conspire to beget a terror in our hearts, yet my reason tells me, even from
those lamentable Stories that make love seem so dangerous, that we most unjusty
blame Love when it is the Lover that is in fault; for Love is not in himself our
Enemy; Love is as wholesome and as natural a passion as any that affects the
heart; and only corrupted loves are dangerous; Love and Wine may both be
poisoned; should we therefore curse the Vine? No, it is Love, wounded with
Jealousy and Inconstancy, or Infected with disdain; Love set too high, or too
low, by birth or Nature opposed, which, thus set out of her reach, or so low in
the Earth that Honor cannot stoop to gather her blessings; or else at such a
height that even Hope loses his Leap, and the noble Fruit hangs still to tempt
us: or a worse Curse than all these, which is my fate, to love a scornful Maid
that loves another: these are the true grounds of Lovers miseries, and their
Errors are falsely laid upon Love, and all our stubborness called his Crimes,
when we, not Love, are blind, who is indeed the gentle Ty of all Mankind,
though he be made many times the most innocent Root of many mischiefs, and
would be all Honey still but that our Reason gives him a sting; Reason,
Roderigo, which Chain the Gods, have thrown upon us; for we no sooner covet and
know what would please us, but we find it still forbidden; and from this Root
(this Reason) all the foregoing miseries are derived; kind Nature else would
be obeyed, and all these troubles pass without a thought or grief. But to our
business, which I Am sure, Love shall never be with Almanzor


Yet 'twould be fit to be civil, and either send or go your self to the Prison,
you have handsome cause enough to yield you an Excuse; dissemble your past
anger, being in the heat of battle, incensed by her scorn, whose sharp language
and your wounds smarting made you speak and act beyond your Reason: Come Sir,
when you can win two Crowns with a few fair words never refuse to play at any
gamc Fortune proposes: besides, I have observed it, Women sooner forgive faults
done to them, than those they do to others; for their shame is more than their
anger can be; and it is easier flattering their weakness into pity than ripening
their Reason into Justice or Discretion: The left-side is predominant in them
still: could I love one Woman better than another, (which I am so far from
believing Virtue, that I think I ought to be beaten for it) if I did not with
your game win any Woman I Would never command Men again. Death, what Cards would
you have to play if these lose? A young handsome General, a Prince, and
Conqueror, that has wit and courage, and yet be strangled in an Apronstring!
sigh and let a Smock smother me! They shall bury me under the Gallows when I die
of that Disease; No faith, if any of them be too hard for me it shall be in
Bed, and there let them use me as they please; I care not whether I win or lose
in their arms, and he that desires more of Love than such a kindness is mad:
when I embrace her if she smile and do speak like a Lover, let her heart be as
busy as she pleases, and make any other happy till I miss her company. I do
not remember I ever sighed, yet I think I have had my share of Women, but I
would not be so miserable as to remember any of their faces for a Kingdom, for
then I might be subject to Constancy, a Disease harder to be cured than the
Pox; Constancy is really a weak-stomack'd Lover: My heart digests a Mistress
presently, and hungers for another; thirsts and enjoys her without any thought
of Constancy and Remembrance; but the last is as dangerous as if my Supper
should ly in my belly always, where should my Dinner go? If ever your fine
Arguments persuade me to be one of your one Meals men, you shall geld me; give
me an appetite every meal in the day, and kind hearts to feed on, Wit and
Beauty will find a Cook, and we'll make our Sauce our selves


This Doctrine I am no Heretic in, Roderigo; yet I believe you will allow a
man may love one Dish better than another, and so far I am a Lover


Fast and get a stomach, Sir; then all that is young and kind is fair and
pleasing; so far I am happy though no Lover


All things are in readiness for your Highness departure, and we only stay for
your direction


I Will wait upon your Highness to the Prison.


Is all ready?


Yes, Sir, but it is somewhat of the darkest to put to Sea, within two hours the
Moon will rise; and being not streightn'd in our time, I shall counsel your
Highness to stay a little; two hours of the Ebb carries us out of all dangers


When it is time call at my Quarters; Come, Roderigo, within we'll resolve of
this new business, Love


This I feared; but how to prevent it, something as speedy as their mischief
must be thought of


WHy this sadness now when our great griefs and fears are over? Why thus
ingratefully in silence do we receive blessings we scarce could hope for? when
all our Fates both of Love and Hate were doubtful, none were sad; the great and
general calamity past without concern, Pollidor and Palantus with all their
Faith and Loyalty could find room for Love and Anger; and now when our losses
are repaired they sigh and droop for shadows


And Pollidor that never knew Love, Fear, nor Grief, but mine, till this Figure
filled his breast, now when he should sacrifice droops and hangs his head like
Flowers oppressed with showers; now when kinder Fate has unriddl'd all our doubts
beyond our hopes, dispersing all those mists we must have wandered in, by the
bright eyes of the divine Bellamira. Fie Pollidor, can thou be sorry for any
honor the Gods have heaped upon thy Mistress? Thy sadness now is self-love,
and shows her Excellence is too great a Guest to lodge in thy narrow heart.
Fond Man, would thou be happier than to love and be beloved by such a person;
a begging Lover with her alms is richer than those that triumph in the spoils
and embraces of another Queen


I see our passions, Phillora, are the innocent thoughts of pure minds; we
love Honor and Virtue only; and when they are in safety we know no fears:
these men have Designs and farther ends in their desires than their blushings
dare declare, else our joys must have found theirs


It Is too great a truth, Madam, I can prove it in my self; for my condition is
equally miserable to theirs; Are not my youth and hopes equal to Pollidor's?
Are not my dangers great as yours? Is not my stake as great and rich as any
that now distrusts their fortune? Is there not the same distance betwixt me and
my happiness that you tremble at? Yet I smile, because I know I desire no
unreasonable thing; all my wishes are to see these Princes happy


Can you hear this and not blush to find two Maids prompt you to find your
resolution? We that are esteemed the weak Sex, that Shadows have led in Chains,
I that have suffered under a desperate Love without groaning or crying out for
help, seven tedious Winters afflicted with a Figure in a Dream, and till this
day never saw the thing I loved, yet now it is met it shall not make me guilty
of a blush for any action, though I know there be a Fate and future Prophecy
wrapped in this Cloud (which thou art) and even my own wishes have something in
them which I can fear; but Bellamira will die rather than stain her story; and
if Pollidor and Palantus have that honor they pretend they will cease to
afflict our minds with their sadness, and patiently expect that Birth Heaven
and Nations have thus labored to bring forth


Thus at your feet I fall, struck more by this Virtue now, than by your Beauty
heretofore: Oye Gods, the divine Bellamira's miseries but set her off, and
upbraid your justice that could neglect such a mind when they had taken pains
to make it. And now be pleased to know my silence was no guilty fear of my own
misfortunes, but revolving in my mind your fatal Dream, whose every particular
is explained, which makes me wonder who this Youth can be whom Fate has marked
out for the Envy of Mankind, though Nature have conspired against him, and set
him as far from the reach of his happiness as there is distance between a
Cottage and a Crown; yet see, Madam, if sadness have not seized his heart,
destined to lodge the greatest Guest that ever yet possessed the mind of man,
Bellamira's love


Sure Pollidor has not so poor a spirit as to be sad for himself; I should hate
him more than I love him now if I believed his heart could be so narrow as to
wish his own happiness at such a rate as profaning of this Princess; add for
less thou can not hope to purchase her: Let not this grieve Pollidor, but
resolve to follow thy Sister still. Remember 'twas she that led thee to this
degree of Honor: Remember how, contrary to Nature, Sex, and Custom, inspired
by the Deity of Love, I laid violent hands upon thy heart, and forced thee to
receive those glories thou now art proud of, in spite of that low mean hatred
of a gallant Prince which would have held thee back: Look upon these wounds,
there is a beauty in them, and a grace even in these scars, such as no Virgin
can excel with all the art of dress; and I glory more for having received them
for these Princes, then in any my revenge gave this day upon our enemy


Certainly, when your Highness shall consider my part, 'twill not appear
strange that my mind is possessed with wonder; and then I hope my silence will
find your pardon: I would I had lost my Reason with my hopes; that enemy Reason
that informed my soul, and made me aspire that happiness; the loss of which she
now presents with horror to my mind. Yet, know all the world, Pollidor can
neither repent, dissemble, nor tame his love, though he can dye when a less
cause then your Highness displeasure calls; but will not be hired to live at a
less rate then your pardon. And Phillora may call to mind something consonant
to this fatal Dream; does she not remember how in our most innocent days, the
Dreams our distracted sleeps have had? what honors and what worship has been
paid us from crowds of unknown faces? which compared with this waking Dream
seem to revive, though darkly and afar off, something from those nothings; and
these thoughts begot that guilty silence which displeased my Sister. But though
Phillora can chide my silence now, I fear she will shortly find her heart
subject to thoughts too, whose strange kind of fortune is like troubled waters
now, and the storm is yet in her streams; but when it is settled, honor and
quiet of mind will divide thy heart; for though she thinks now her heart will
desire nothing but leave to love the Prince; know, Phillora, those roots that
are in the spring contented to send forth a bud, their sollicitous natures are
busy still to nourish them; such is thy heart now Love but buds in it, and it
will break to see that after all thy care that flower thou dotest on should
hang upon another bosom; and all thy sweets and graces wither in that shadow;
and while thou dy'st to make a handsome story, some one less excellent, but
more fortunate, surfeit on those sweets thou pinest for; then thou will find
how vain and idle a good pity is, and that fruit (if they love) poor and
virtuous Phillora may reap; for pity is a good that is still attended with
misery, dear bought, being never purchased at less rates then ruin; and they
may be happy that can pity, but the wretched are still their subject; now thou
hang'st thy head, blasted with this sad truth; and now thy soul is awakned I
defy thy heart to be at peace


Alas, Phillora, ignorant of the dangers we were in made us laugh in this
storm; and those waves which we were pleased with to see toss our Barque,
threaten destruction to us, unpracticed in that dangerous element, which
Pollidor, like a Pilot, wisely apprehends, and arms against the known ill,
whose dangers I dare not now behold: something above Reason must secure our
Reason, else sadness and despair must find us all


Madam, I have heard all, and shall conclude, as to play a Game that must be
lost, is childish; so to throw up all Cards that agree not with our wishes,
shows covetousness and impatience; we do not always play for gain, sometime
company and pastime engage us; and I am resolved such fates as are dealt me
I Will receive; and show how much I am above that fortune that opposes me; and if
I cannot be happy, yet (against my miseries) I have this remedy, I dare dye;
that pale guest needs but little invitation; especially to those that care not
to live, nothing is so easy, nor so pleasing Pollidor, that are but beggars at
this feast, may go when we will without taking leave, or being missed


Help, help for charity.


Whence came that cry for help?


As you have charity help the wretched; oh my fate! must I look on and see his
dear limbs torn, and not have power to help him


What strange misery is that that stands in need of our help to relieve him,
that are our selves laden with misfortunes


Heaven bless the Prince from use of such a succor; hark, whence came the cry?
sure 'twas from above; I fear the Prince may be discovered in his design of our
safety; if so, lasie slow death, in spite of thy envy, I Will find a way to meet
the Prince, and hasten thy visit hither


Are you all deaf to our miseries? have the wretched no sense of others misery?
are your hearts hardened to our sufferings, who beg nothing but the mercy of a
speedy death


It Is in the Cave; some other prisoners, sure, I Will take a light and see in
what our charity can serve them


Hold, I hear the Prison door open, and that light comes this way; be silent
and observe, lest some unlooked for danger happen


It Is about the hour the Prince bad us expect him.


Some new calamity, I read it in thy eyes, Leopoldo; speak, what fate must we
expect


The time's too short to execute my design, for now at this instant the Guards
are coming to fetch you forth; and this night you must away for Sicily, in
company of the Tyrant, whose designs my heart dreads to think of, which e're he
shall execute I am resolved, though I sacrifice my life, I Will strike him to the
earth; this must suddenly be done, unless we can surprise the Guards, and thus
in the dead of night make an escape; see, here are Weapons for all. -- Thus
armed and thus unexpected, who knows what success may attend the justice and
resolution of this action? Phillora is the Word; Here then let us embrace, as
friends and fellows in a great calamity, whose sad estates admits no cure but
this desperate attempt


The gods, and Prince Leopoldo's fortunes guide us.


Oh the misery of men, fallen below the pity even of


What voice was that?


It Is some wretch in the Dungeon; just as your Highness opened the door he
called for help, and your coming put us off from inquiring what it meant


Alas, alas! how cruel are men to men! See, if the very beasts do not prey upon
the living members of the wetched


Sir, your habit speaks you a Soldier, and since you are Master of those great
blessings, Arms and Freedom, be merciful to the wretched, who only beg some
charitable wounds to relieve them; I hope you will not find your sword the
power for such an alms. See, Sir, two of many, two in number, one in blood and
misery, the dearer part of my soul, all that the Plague and Famine has left to
finish such sad fates as a cruel enemy shall impose, despised and forgotten,
neither worth his cruelty nor his care, unless your sword relieve us; and yet
our crimes are only our Nation. --


Your color speaks you strangers; and your miseries have begot a pity, which I
have time only to relieve, but not to inform my self of; what were those that
run away?


Foxes, who daily haunt this place, and will scarce expect while we are dead,
but grown bold upon our afflictions prey upon the living; yonder lies my friend
oppressed with sickness whose words they despise; nor could all our threats nor
cries prevail; slavery has so defaced the image of the gods in miserable man,
that the creatures have lost the respect and reverence due to him; dull
captivity has given such strange allay to that rich metal that man was at first
coined in, that we are not current among beasts


Sir, we are prisoners too; and now upon forcing our freedoms a sword and
liberty I can give; and if you will take your fortune with us you shall be
welcome


When I have afforded this charity to my friend I shall most readily join in
any design, to be revenged on this barbarous enemy


One of those keys I believe will open his locks; and while you perform that
charity I Will satisfy my self concerning those Foxes. -- How should they come
hither? surely there is a way out, else how could they come in? I Will see the
issue of this chance. --


Oh Brother, what new blessing's this that gives thee to my Arms, what means
this freedom? will they at last be kind, and let us dye


No, gentle Sister, a better star guides us; and far from hence be those sad
rites of Funeral, till we have taken some revenge upon that barbarous power
under which we have thus long suffered


Sir, your goodness I hope will excuse our tardy visit, when you shall know we
are under the same slavery, and but this hour released from our chains


Our gratitude, not our excuse is due; and all my past miseries you have buried
in this great blessing, and I shall at last be free, or dye revenging the
injuries this poor Girl has suffered, the only precious part of my soul; whose
youth has been persecuted with the worst of ills that Love or Fortune could
threaten, and all for loving a gallant man; whose noble heart I know would
bleed could he but fear the miseries she suffers for him, though he be her
Prince. This ambitious passion has made her taste many a bitter thought: Her
color makes this story strange to your ears, and this black makes it look like
a fable, when we say we love; though here be the sad example of that little
god, great in power; whose dart has fired her private mind, and the saucy flame
aspires her Prince's breast; yet she is nobly born, and what was my blessing
proved her misery; for had not I been blessed with his friendship she had not
never been miserable with the sight of him; this as a secret her troubled mind
concealed till the Prince was lost at the fatal battle of Carthage; since which
misery I have wasted my days in slavery, and by chance met this poor Girl,
hunting through diverse miseries a peaceful grave, seduced by a Witch, who
ignorant of her sex, being asked her fortune, bad her seek her happiness in the
hand of a white woman, strange and impossible


I am very faint, yet my heart divines some blessing from the sight of those
fair eyes. --


How my soul shakes to hear this poor Maids misery! and my pity would fain
believe, amongst us, she might find that blessing that seems most desperate in
her fortunes. Palantus, pray give her something to drink. -- And be not
dejected with thoughts of past ills; you are now amongst a company that dare
vie with your most desperate thoughts; and yet will not doubt the rewards due
to their innocence


Her fortune is so like my own I cannot but love her, I grow concerned too in
her miseries


My thanks is due to all; but the joy and wonder of this hour has made me
neglet the payment, which I shall do in prayers to all the gods, that ye may
never know the use of such a kindness, by having tasted those sad calamities
that wound my mind


Be quiet and resolved; for I hear some noise at the Prison door; which way
went the Prince? let us retire, for they are now shutting of the door


EIther my Eyes deceived me, or they were foxes; I saw them leap.


Foxes, fool? whence should they come?


Why from their burrow among the Rocks, forced with hunger to seek their prey;
finding us in their way, what is more natural for those beasts then to force
through us? Let us return and see if we can find any sign of their passage


How easy it is to give fire to fear! Our late danger makes us apprehend every
noise. Hark, it is something scrapes within. -- See, see, the furrs hang upon
the Rocks still; how contemptible a thing this fear is


How long are the hours that sorrow loves! Time passes like a thought when we
are happy; But Oh, how tedious will my Arcus, do you see that light


It Is something strange, but what Heaven knows; A light in the earth! Be not
amazed, collect your selves; If our fears be true, what is there in fortune
left for fear? Hark, I hear a noise too, listen. -- Do you not hear a noise and
strokes? It Is some Witchcraft sure. -- It Is a man, I hear his voice, and his
words have reason; I Will speak to it what e're it be. -- Ho! within, what art
thou? how came thou to this cave? what seek'st thou in this place of misery?


I Will answer it. -- A wretched Prisoner whom the merciless Enemy has exposed
in chains to the rage of wild Beasts; What e're thou art, for charity give some
relief to the wretched, by informing our miseries where thou art, for thy light
has deceived me pursuing of those Beasts that would have devoured us; I hoped
to have found a passage this way, which now is desperate


Hark, sure I know that voice.


And I that sound, or else my miseries deceive me. Arcus! Arcus


Prince Leopoldo!


The same; struck with wonder and amazed, what are we next to expect from Fate?
Are we all Prisoners then


No, Royal Sir; we are in freedom yet, though their nets are pitched about us;
Help, help, Philemon, to remove these stones, and force a passage here


things my Heart can wish, glad to find my Love approved by so great a Mistress
in the School of Honor; By whose name I vow to the gentle Cadesse an eternal
Faith, and Hymen shall witness my Vow


All the gods say Amen.


We must be gone, but whither, oh whither! Sad Fate! that must be gone, but
knows not where to find a safety


Not whither? Yes, to Gaietta, where faithful Clytus resides; Wonder not that I
call him faithful, time will unriddle all; and (I hope) my Sister will not
refuse to trust those that I esteem faithful, until we gain Gaietta; Love and
Bellamira's Fortune shall guide us


I submit, and where Leopoldo trusts will not ask a why; and if Clytus be
faithful, and we escape, let us hereafter no more throw the scandal of blind
guides on Love and Fortune; but freely deliver our selves to their protectior


COmmand them pique their Oars, and let her drive with the Tide, lest the
quietness of the night discover us with the noise; the Moon is risen too


Sir, The boat that came from the Town is put under the Cliff, and there we saw
lights


Give order to hide ours, lest they betray us as theirs have done them.


Ours are hid.


We have the wind and tide to friend, she cannot to sea but we must meet her;
if she fall into the Bay, the other Galleys are ready to oppose her; Come, Sir,
let us look out, it is a fine Evening


It Is so, and if our honest intentions find their gods, I hope to see a
glorious day in Naples


ROderigo, if you can think of any thing to be added to your Commission or
Instructions, send after me and it shall be confirmed


At present I can think of nothing; for till your Highness and the purchase be
arrived in Sicily, (which is indeed the root of all your business) all other
thoughts are idle; and pray, Sir, let me prevail with your passion this night
to treat them civilly, and make excuses to the Princess for your past neglects;
Confess you know the debts are great you must pay er'e she can believe you a
Lover; and if you prevail not with her Heart, consider how miserable you must
be though you should force her to a Marriage, when you must sleep in the bosom
of an oppressed incensed princess that looks upon you as the Murderer of her
father, brother, and destroyer of her Country; Which, with that soft gentle
passionate Sex is a grief above all the rest; her heart must tell her 'twas
prince Almanzor, that destroyer of the man she loved, to your face, the anguish
of soul threw out that secret knowledge which upon my life the person himself
could never win from her; but distracted with her affliction, or anger, to
spite your heart, has given you a secret her bosom friend never was partaker
of


It Is reason all thou urgest, and I confess my self a beast when my passion
rules me; but I will now endeavor to redeem my fault


Sir, your Civility, If it does not get you a wife, yet it will oblige her, and
make her your friend; 'twill be no small advantage to your success; and having
her in your power, it may diverse ways advance your affairs in Sicily; Her love
and passion for another, with the right she has to the Crown, and Interest in
the people, you may by compounding her freedom secure your Conquest in Sieily;
think on it, Sir, and let not passion for a woman seduce you; and Remember
Kingdoms, Sir, are scarce, and there are many chapmen, and women are common,
and grow every where; let us be wise men, Sir, and when we cannot do what we
would, do what we can


How now, where is your fellow, that we sent for?


And please your Highness, we cannot find him; it is not above an hour since he
went into the prison, whose doors are still locked, and the key in the Inward
side


Did you knock?


Yes, Sir, but no body would answer.


Death! not answer, Sir, let us force the doors.


Here Is the nest, but the Birds are fled.


Haste to the guard, command no person whatsoever pass without my order, let
them seize all


Perhaps, Sir, they are hid; for it is not possible they should be gone, and the
door shut


Search, Villains, 'twill concern you, for your lives are at stake.


Your Highness found us upon our duties, the doors shut, we cannot answer for a
prison


What Path is this? it is full of the new steps of many feet; let us follow
these signs, see whither it leads


Here they have escaped, but it is certain this pass was found by chance; and
being so lately gone cannot be far from hence; search the Rocks hereabouts,
they are but three men, unarmed, and two women; let us lose no time, Roderigo,
but divide, and call if you see any body; this Accident has destroyed all our
hopes; fool, fool, too late thou find the punishment of thy barbarous rage


IS it far, we must go?


No, Sir, the Boat Rides under you Cliff.


Haste, haste aboard, or we are all lost; a party of armed men pursues us, I
saw them and their lights Issue from the Cave


To the Boat then dear Bellamira, and with thee take these our friends, and
dearest pledges of our lives; Philemon, by all thy past kindness I conjure
thee, take it not unkindly that I desire thy age to retire with these to a
place of safety


I Will not stir unless Phillora will be my Guard.


Gentle Phillora, let me once prevail, and now wait upon the princess Bellamira
while I with Faith and Duty follow the brave Leopoldo


I obey, and scorn to doubt that fate, that the prince, and Pollidors swords
strike, to defend


Away, away, I hear their noise; when we are engaged lie off from the Shore; if
we be fortunate we'll call you back; The word shall be Victory and Phillora


COurage, Sir, it must be they, they fly us; it is impossible they should have
means to escape


Let Us pursue them close then.


THose lights a shore must be they; they have now doubled the Point, the Boat
too is but a small Fisherman


I counted them by their lights, they are not above a dozen in number; let us
land a small party upon this Point, and it is impossible they should escape us,
for we are now betwixt them and their Boat, which I have commanded the Galley
to surprise


I am of Clytus his opinion, and that it be executed with diligence.


I Will command the Boat ashore then.


STand, and make good this pass, by this, our Friends are secured; and let us
make them find the danger of pursuing a Lion to his Den


See Roderigo, here they are.


Ha! Almanzor! nay, then the Fates are kind.


Is there no more of you? Fools, what made you venture upon even terms? do you
think our Innocence, and the Princess Bellamira's cause, is no odds


Ha, how the devil came they Armed?


Hence this disguise. -- Shall stories say Leopoldo feared to be known when
Fate set him, Man to man, to dispute Fortunes with Almanzor? no Tyrant, see
Leopoldo


Ha! Leopoldo.


Yes, Almanzor; but see a Saucy Wood-man, that will strike the fairest Deer in
the herd, or fall at his foot


And the best is best cheap.


O! and this last sigh for Bellamira.


Ly thou there.


To fall under Leopoldo, though it be ill luck, it is no shame; your chance is
good


And so is Roderigo's; and let him thank this Disguise for his Life, under
whose protection this day I safely heard him speak like a Man of Honor, which
has made me forget he was an Enemy -- Hold, every man hold. Let us not use our
Advantage with cruelty, while I embrace the noble Pollidor, and congratulate
with Princely Pyrrhus our strange delivery


Though nothing be welcomer than the Princely embraces of Leopoldo, yet let us
remember how dear these pawns are which yet are exposed to Fortune; and when
they are safe let us rejoice as Winners


Ha! the Princess taken! this my Soul apprehended: See Sir how busy mischief
has been, and prepare to redeem the Princess


Hold, Pollidor, while I to Prince Leopoldo discover a Secret which will seem
strange and full of wonder; yet witness Heaven, I shall deliver nothing but a
happy Truth, a Truth that has already found the wish and faith of the persons
most concerned; and to gain the speedier credit with your Highness, be pleased
to receive this Signet from your Royal Father, who impatiently expects your
Highness at Gaietta; the Princess and this joyful Company are already
satisfied with my news which I shall begin with throwing at your feet the old
Ravack


Ha! Ravack alive!


A Name sometimes well known to Palantus, who here presents to your embraces
our King, and your Kinsman, the young Genorio, Son to the unfortunate Ortho,
whom cross Fate has thus long hid in the person of the gallant Pollidor. A
Secret not less to him than to your Highness, for which upon my knees I beg his
pardon


Is this my Royal Kinsman?


What do I hear?


Be not amazed at this new Truth; for it was by the counsel of your Friends we
concealed your Birth and Quality, which I should have discovered could I have
promised my self your safety


Have I lost the dear Phillora by this knowledge, Is not she my Sister still?


Yes, Royal Sir, Phillora is a Branch from the same great Stock -- And what
change this knowledge may bring her Fortune we must consult your Highness
breast; my heart flatters Hymen's


Then the Gods have been careful of poor Leopoldo, whose heart Phillora knows
was resolved (at the price of all things, but my Honor) to have purchased her
friendship; and I will not now be so faulty to her as to fear her faith


If sullen Fate had robbed the noble mind of the great Leopoldo of all those
Royal Dignities that distinguished him from common men (as Fortune threatened
once this day, acting her worst to destroy him) yet my Soul witness I should
have torn from my head all those unlook'd-for Glories she has heaped upon me,
to have repaired the Prince, from whom I beg that Hymen now I refused, and
defy the World (being Leopoldo's) to make me miserable or faulty


To Gaietta, and there let the Gods see us possess the blessing they have
prepared for us; but first let me embrace the faithful and kind Ravack, who
as a Father shall ever be loved and reverenced by us; and to you, Sir, though
once an Enemy, thus I open my arms; no Excuses, Clytus, this habit gave a
sufficient satisfaction, in which as a private Soldier I heard thy dispute
with that unhappy Prince, by whose discourse I can witness Clytus his faith to
his Prince, which has reconciled me to all his Errors


Your goodness, Sir, has bound my heart for ever; I confess 'twas a blind zeal
I followed my Master's interest with; and my faithful heart has found this
great blessing for his reward


Bellamira, thy Hand Bellamira; Is there so much of Pollidor remaining in
Genorio, as still to desire to change a Sister? If there be, let Bellamira
strive to out-vy Phillora in Love and Faith, and thus become one Root again,
while the different Branches bear the same Fruit, Love and Friendship


Sure, it is not believed I should find words to express my joys; this is a
blessing I must thus approach upon my knees, and shall always possess as
Servant to Bellamira


Your knee, Sir, but teaches me what I owe the King, nor will I allow you have
a greater share in this joy than I: this blessed discovery has cleared us of
all the guilt that stained our Family, while the precious blood of your self
and Phillora lay upon our name. This Storm has happily waked me from a fatal
Dream, and now is settling into Innocence and Peace. Heaven witness how dear the
name of Genorio was ever to me; and since the kinder Fates have made him and
Pollidor all one, my heart has nothing left me to wish: Now I can rejoice when
I call to mind the doubtful hopes Genorio (as Pollidor) lately pursued; and I
hope this confession that I believed Pollidor loved will satisfy Genorio; he
that desires more Arguments of my Love than a Faith of his must die unsatisfi'd
by Bellamira; for I can tell it all the World sooner than Pollidor, and hide it
too from all but him; what is the rest of Fortune that should make Pollidor
thus sad


My silence, Madam, is neither sad nor dullness, but a busy mind, confused and
surpised with joy of un-imaginable blessings, in which the Crown was the least
part. They were the thoughts of the divine Bellamira that drew my Reason into
my self, that I might with an humble thankful heart contemplate the great
Giver and the glorious Gift. Can you believe, Madam, your Friendship is to be
possessed with less than distracting joys? At this time to be deaf and dumb
speaks Love best, and my ambitious heart whispers there is a hope in this
change that I may outlive my despairs


No more of Fear, Sir; for know, I do not hide my joys, curious to conceal them
or my thoughts from Pollidor; but because I fear 'twould look like
Dissimulation to tell him how happy this day has made me; and now I beg he will
let me conceal my joy for my own sake, as I did my grief this day in tenderness
of Pollidor, whose griefs were then the afflictions of my heart


Vanity and folly would only ask more than your great heart freely gives:
Know, Madam, when I have wasted my life in gratitude my last breath shall be my
last thanks, if I possess such a blessing as to be yours for ever


By this, and by this Phillora, I conjure thee no more of doubt nor fear.
Heaven and Earth are reconciled, and we shall stand the marks of their
blessings here


With you, Sir, there is fullness of joy; and I shall be forced to use all the
virtue Heaven has sent me to receive this blessing of Leopoldo's friendship;
therefore cease to ask any thing of Phillora that has nothing left in her heart
to give but your self again, and when unkind you will rob me of that I will die
to make me a passage through my heart, for nothing but death can force that
dear name from thence


No more, no more; this kind strife and emulation in your love will make us
waste a happy age together.


From your hands, Madam, with joy I receive and give this faith, and I doubt
not but Fidelia will approve my faith the better, for having seen it tried by
despair, and approved by so great a Judge in Love as the divine Bellamira


Nor shall I think my heart less brave for being folded in those arms your
Highness refused, nor esteem the love and friendship of Palantus worse for
having been worn by so brave a Princess


This, Palantus, is that I had to beg; and now I conjure thee by all that love
and gallantry thou have been so diligent to show the world, pay here thy vows
to friendship, and I shall be happy by being able to make my dear Fidelia so


Madam, my love was always obedient, but here is no occasion to show it; and
now I lament the virtues of the sad and kind Fidelia which give me no room to
express your power. Fidelia has a Beauty and a Virtue to be sought after at the
price of Kingdoms, and hazard of all that is most dear to man, and it is to
injure her to receive her as courtesy from her who knows my soul had always a
value and kindness for her; and truth still dwelt in my heart; for since I
would not ly to thee that loved, but plainly told I loved another, be confident
I shall never ly hereafter; and now I have said that here before the Gods of
Gratitude and Truth, in the presence of this Princess, I vow a faithful
friendship to the gentle Fidelia


Your hand, Fidelia; this days misery shall beget to morrows joy and wonder.


These strange unlook'd-for blessings, like Dreams of troubled minds, are so
far beyond our hopes they can scarce find our faiths: See, Madam, the first
change of Fortune was of this your Servant; you will laugh, Madam, and scorn,
when you shall know Arcus was one of your Train, and those eyes made me forget
my Love, till the miseries and kindness of this Maid strangely struck my heart;
and I beg the Honor to let our Hymen's Torch be lighted at your blessed fire;
the black is but the shadow of a beauteous soul, and secures us from Rivals in
our Loves


Until your Highness has seen the King I beg we may defer the rest of this
story, where there are many Friends that long to pay their duty here; you will be
pleased, Sir, to give Clytus your Commission to publish this joyful news to the
Army


Why this Ceremony to me? If I be your King, I command you live still like a
Father with me; and may Heaven frown upon me when I forget the affection of a
Son. O Phillora! this day is thine, and (if we outlive it) our peaceful Cell
we'll to a Temple turn; but where is our Friend the Satyr


Fled, with Joy, to bear these tidings to the King.


Let not our Joys rob us of our Humanity toward these, the Enemies of our
peace, since fortune used them as the means to the happy discovery. Pallantus,
let that unfortunate prince be taken up, and his body embalmed, and mourned, as
becomes his birth; his miseries were his own seeking, no fault of ours; To you,
Roderigo, the body shall be delivered; and to let you taste part of our Joys,
in this your misery, you shall have fair leave, and all things fit, to make
your retreat; provided you withdraw your Forces out of Sicily, and quit all you
pretend to there; to this, I hope, Prince Genorio will agree


This generosity is like the Character the world gives of great Leopoldo; and
he shall find his humanity has overcome more then his Sword; and from such an
Enemy We shall not be ashamed to have received Conditions, nor fail to Magnify
the just Leopoldo


This Charity being done, we may safely review our happyness, mine has his
Center here. Lead the way, Clytus, to the Temple; there let us finish those
blessings that the Sword has but begun


And since such blessings from our Dreams we see;
And that I still may happy be,
Let Bellamira Dream for me.


