THE FIRST PART OF Bellamira her Dream: OR, THE Love of Shadows. A
TRAGI-COMEDY, The Scene NAPLES and SICILY

Written in VENICE, BY THOMAS KILLIGREW.

DEDICATED TO THE Lady MARY VILLIERS DUCHESS OF RICHMOND and LENOX.

LONDON: Printed by J. M. for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the sign of the Blew Anchor, in the lower Walk of the New-Exchange. 1663

Bellamira 's habit, when disguised, some Antic handsome Property.

Pollidor, Phillora, and Ravack, must be habited like Foresters, part Hunters,
part Shepherds habit; neither Rich nor Plain, but proper all, of different
Colors; For the two young ones, gray and blue, hair Color, white and some
silver; Phillora must have a piece of the Lions Skin in her habit; Ravack must
have a very white Curled head and Beard of Hair

The Satyr must have a Call of Silk and Silver, and the Wool of Phelice made
into a kind of scrip on one side, and the Horns of Phelice gilt tied to the
ends of it

Arcus must be in a Noble habit, Rich, and his Person black, being a Moor.

It Is for certain, the people at last have found a head, to whom Clytus is
joined; and I fear will follow the Revenge with as little mercy as the King
showed his brother, our dead Master, the Royal Ortho; whose invasion though we
neither counseled, nor assisted, yet such is the fate of Courts, when the
People Arm against their Princes; which we have sadly proved, who now suffer
that punishment which was meant to the Authors of that unnatural War


Is the Spanish Prince arrived at Naples? is there a ground for that report?


Most certain; led on by Clytus, Their descent in Sicily found no resistance;
the people were so generally disaffected with the present Government they
willingly consented to put themselves under the prince's protection; This news
has awaked the King, till then lost in security; and now too late he finds the
fire he despised has taken hold of his Palace. The prince Leopoldo is absent
too; A person of that Piety and Virtue, but that he is the cloud that shadows
our young King, and unjustly possesses his right, I could join with the world
in worship of him; and it was indeed his Interest, joined with his noble
Sisters, which these late years has kept the people quiet; But the prince and
Palantus being absent in these late disorders, our Friends have taken hold of
the occasion, and prevailed so far, that the people are now Armed in the Name
of our long lost prince; which hope, joined with their hatred of the present
Government, has begot a danger. The King cannot resist, but it is thought he
will be forced to leave Naples, and seek a safety in Capua, that place in my
Opinion being fittest to make his general Rendevouz. This news was the cause of
my sending for you, that you might avoy'd the present danger which the prince
Leopoldo and Palantus his Army may bring, who are now upon their march toward
Naples, and must pass through your Forest, where your abode, during these
troubles, will be most unsafe; and to prevent a mischief, pray let me counsel
your self, and the Children, to retire hither this Evening. Where did you leave
them


A hunting, in which they both delight; Books, and that, are their great
diversion; and I am glad to find their Affections so Innocent, and minds so
ready still to take fire at any great Example they meet in Story: I left them
this morning in chase of a wild Bore; nor is Phillora less masculine in her
Spirit then P^llidor, but far from cruel, or Barbarous; I have wondered to see
her give such wounds, and then lament them; she has indeed overcome all the
Niceties of her Sex, and yet retains the softness of her Nature; and though she
loves to be one still in all our Sports, yet a modest, innocent, and most
gentle assuredness attends all her Actions


Nature and Sex are but materials that custom works upon; and both Sexes are
Effeminate, or Warlike, as they are bred; -- but no more of this: time is too
precious; Now or Never we must regain our Country, Prince and Liberty; Clytus,
our Friend, is already joined with the Spanish Prince, and Commands in Naples;
The Castles are in his hands, declared for the survying heirs of the dead
Ortho, and with his our Forces shall this day join; and if the gods have enough
revenged that rash Act of our unfortunate Master, We, the remnant of his
friends, that this sixteen years have suffered all kinds of Calamities for his
fault, may yet hope to return to our Country. In the mean time, Cleon, let
some diligent spy follow the Princes Army, and learn (if it be possible) his
intentions, and observe his motions, numbers, and Affections of his Soldiers


That my tame Satyr shall do; he is crafty, and seems simple, armed with his
Club he shall mingle with them; he is acquainted too with all the Fasts of the
Forest, secret paths and Caves, and can, in spite of their swiftest horses,
make a retreat; the poor wretch dotes upon my Girl; and if she will but promise
to sing, or play to him, there is no danger, for her sake, he will not attempt;
but I must return e're they miss me


Farewell, the Gods guide our honest intents; it is not for Revenge, but justice,
that we strike


PHillemon, are those returned we sent to mingle themselves with the multitude,
to try, if 'twere possible to learn the cause of their taking Arms so suddenly


Some, Sir, are returned, all report the same substance in different language,
great oppression, no Justice done upon complaint; But the great cause is, the
pretended pity they ought to have upon their Countrymen, whose long miseries
they publicly lament, whilst others proclaim the joyful news, that their
young prince Genorio lives, who long since was mourned, as part of his Fathers
ruin, whose Injuries to your Majesty, though they were of the highest nature,
yet being a Brother, I could have wished they had not found so severe a Justice


He fell not by any Act of Cruelty that we ought to blush for. -- War, that War
which he most unjustly waged, as 'twas his crime, proved his punishment too.
Sicily was the Conquest of our Father; In which I served him, and with my Blood
entitled my self to that Crown which, at his death, was by my Fathers will
conferred upon me; Naples was my Brothers birthright; yet the gods witness
with me, neither my wishes nor commands were guilty of his or his Childrens
death, which to this hour my soul laments; And if the kinder fates have
preserved them, as they pretend; May all miseries find me, and pursue me to my
Posterity, if I shall not with joy carry these gray hairs to Sicily, and
deliver Naples into their hands, being the undoubted right of their Father


This Piety, Sir, I am confident had long since produced a happy Peace, could
their Party have given faith to it; but their guilt, and doubt of such a
goodness has now bred this Civil War; which the desperate condition of their
banished Nobility I fear will make use of. Clytus is certainly with them, and
now Commands the Castles where he has declared the young King Genorio, and his
Sister, the Princess, Phidamira living, with which Joy the people are possessed;
and your Majesty must look upon that Joy as your Enemy; For I cannot believe
the report true, though I confess I wish it; it is but a pretense, to set the
people against your Majesty, and gain a power to work your ruin; to prevent
which, my Counsel is, that your Majesty immediately proclaim Genorio King, and
pardon to all if they can produce him, and require a cessation of Arms till the
people be satisfied, whether your Majesty or their Intentions be most
Ingenuous, in restoring the young King to his Right


Arcus, what news? Thy looks are full of trouble; How do thou find the people
inclined


To the ruin, Sir, of your self and Family; they call the Prince and Princess
Dissemblers, and Betrayers of their Trust, your Majesty Usurper, Tyrant, and
Murderer of your Brother and his Children. Pardon, Sir, this blunt relation; my
gratitude for the freedom I have found makes me unwilling to flatter your
Majesty into a Ruin


How does this agree with Clytus his proclaiming their Prince Genorio King?


Alas, Sir, Reason, Justice, nor Honor, you must not look for in this Beast
the Multitude; it is all Back and Belly, no Breast, no room for a Heart; All
Slave when commanded; All Lust when they have power; they are full of Rage and
Wine; Treason and Novelty are the things they worwip: A Slave of the same Gally
where I was Prisoner gave me this Paper; it is a Declaration the Spaniards and
Confederates have dispersed, wherein the Cause and Resolution of this War is
most maliciously set down, and I fear finds too much faith among the people;
they have intelligence too abroad; some (when I was there) came from Capua,
that assured them they had no time to lose, for the Prince Leopoldo was upon
his March, and would within two days be in sight of the City, upon which they
purposed immediately to attempt the Palace; In short, my fear for your Majesty
apprehends the worst that Malice and Treason can act upon your self and royal
Family


Therefore consider, Sir, whether your strength either in the place or number
of your Friends, be able to resist this Torrent till the Prince can come to
give you aid; and if not, take counsel with your safety, and make retreat to
Aversa, it is in the way to Capua, whither your friends shall have private order
to repair; it is in the Princes way too, whose coming is much sooner than they
feared


Your Majesty's safety has no time to spare; this night you must prepare for
Flight or Defense; I have those in readiness shall deliver your Orders for
either as it shall be resolved


What to resolve I know not; My heart scorns to apprehend these Villains; yet
when I consider what Stakes they throw for, how little they can lose, and what
they may win, who knows how Fortune may assist the daring of such Villains? My
dear Bellamira, and Leopoldo too, their Fates are woven in this Thread of mine,
else they should find, old as I am I have not lost one grain of that courage
that gave me conquest in my youth. Prithee find my Bellamira, she must this
night prepare to depart with me. I dare not venture to leave her here; All her
Guards of Beauty, Greatness, or Virtue, are but idle nothings when they meet
the barbarous force of Treason in a raging Multitude: Have you seen her lately,
Philemon


Yes Sit, but so afflicted since the Invasion of the Spaniard, and Revolt of
Sicily, she has scarce eat or slept, and with pain endures the conversation of
her Friends; her mind and fears are still bent upon her Dream, the thought of
which she now trembles at, and apprehends it as a prophetic Vision sent by the
Gods to us to denounce these miseries


'Twas odd, but my innocence makes me secure; and yet I dare neither believe
nor despise it; for though Dreams be the common Issue of Sleep, and are in
relation to the thoughts we have been most affected with the day before, or
take their Births from the Humors that are most predominant in our
Constitutions, yet men may reasonably and piously believe the Gods both do and
have by those strange ways sometimes darkly foretold their Designs; which makes
me neither believe nor contemn all Dreams. -- But no more of this, the night
and Bellamira, if habited like her sex, will be unsafe and incommode; therefore
desire her to make use of a Disguise, and for my sake cheerfully to endure this
first difficulty of our adverse fortune; her Jewels may be useful too, if she
can convey them with her: this and my blessing, good Philemon. Come Arcus, you
must to my Son this night, and acquaint him with our Resolutions, and that the
Rendezvous will be at Aversa; whose strength and provisions I dare rely upon as
well as the faith of him that commands


WHat thinks Fidelia, were my fears vain or no? Is it not visible the Gods in
their care foretold our ills? Is not the Stranger landed, and does not the Dust
fly in our faces? 'Twas too true an Exposition the good Hermit made of my
Dream, who told us, that kicking the Sand at us would prove a dangerous
Rebellion in the People. O Fidelia, my soul is full of horror, yet all mine
own miseries do not at all deject me; but for my Father, his loss, I must
confess, brings a weight of sadness I cannot bear


To deny your cause of grief will but make your anger join, and give new wounds
to your mind; that fatal Dream I have not dared to read, my nature is too
superstitious; yet my curiosity would fain know what Stars rule your Highness
fortune, to which mine is tied, and by a nearer interest, Madam, than your
goodness yet imagines


No, Fidelia, though (I confess) thy modest hiding of a Passion has been very
discreet, yet all the shadows thou could interpose have not obscured it so,
but my grief and kindness have both seen it; and though I cannot be happy my
self, yet it is my joy in the midst of these afflictions I have a power left to
give thee some peace of mind; turn not away, I will not put thee to blush the
rest; only thus much, live assured, if I can serve thee, thou shall be happy
in the wished friendship of thy Palantus; and that thou may give faith to
what I say, at thy leisure read this Paper -- It Is Egyptian Apis in a Dream he
comes; the soft-foot'd God of Sleep is only Witness to our Love


Since your Highness has been pleased to break this silence, giving thousand
joys I never hoped for, take the secret of my heart; it is Love, Madam, so much
more than I can master, it is more than I can tell, and that makes me fear such
a Present as Palantus his Love, when he shall find only a Shadow for his
Rival, may gain an easier Victory than your Highness fears; nor do I blame
Palantus for loving your Highness, it is his greatest virtue to do it; and my
crime to tell you so; because I know though it is an honor to have you there,
yet it is the business of his heart to hide it; and ere I can have his
friendship, his faith must be blasted; for Inconstancy is the first step to any
possibility of my being happy; yet he has ever paid me a Civility; and though I
cannot boast his love, yet he has made me believe he was not displeased that I
love him


Come, dry thy eyes, and calm thy breast; for though he should prove unkind
I Will be faithful still; and if Palantus will hope to act any thing pleasing in
my eye, he must pursue his friendship to Fidelia; for I believe, with the most
excellent Bellessa, that Faith and Constancy are so much lovelier in both
Sexes, than any other Beauty that I should expect from a gallant Woman; she
should sooner spoil her face, than break her faith; and this I shall tell him;
who if he be the gallant Palantus: the world esteems him, he knows all that
Beauty can hope for; nay, all it aspires to is but to create a faith, and bind
the heart it loves; and when Beauty and Love have done their best they make but
one constant Friendship. Nay, Fidelia, how many fair faces do stories mention
that could not make one constant Love, though it has been still the business of
Youth and Beauty


Those Ages, Madam, wanted the divine Bellamira's mind to finish that great
work, whose Friendship will be the envy of the whole world, and may it never
want the pity you have showed me; and as your Scholar I shall pursue Palantus
with a modest heart, and teach him the virtue of a faithful Lover, a mystery
known but to few men


Faith is such a strange good, it is neither valuable nor communicable beyond
two; I mean the Faith of Love; a galiant man cannot be twice faithful; who
would be twice, was never once a Lover


Why are so many Women pleased, then, to gain a servant that was another?


Such women are fit for the Friendship of such of men, and knows not what a
nothing they have won; for instead of a Friendship she only gains a dead
carcass of one that might have been a Lover; And such women, Fidelia, are
guiltier then the men, who must be either foolish or wicked; For Honor is deaf
to their prayers, and blind to their tears; who can say nothing that ought to
prevail where there is Virtue


Unless it be to plead the power of her Beauty that has made him break his
faith to another; quitting Empire there for chains else where


I tell thee, Fidelia, such a wretch that durst hope a reward from me for such
a crime, I should look upon him as one that threw dirt upon my Fame, and my
scorn should tell him so; for he who has impudence enough to plead that guilt
for merit, I shall believe, will never care to be innocent


Oh, Madam, let me kneel to you; And though I cannot accuse Palantus of broken
Faith, yet his dissembled pity makes me beg when he bows before this shrine,
and pleads rewards from your Breast, for scarrs received in others service: O
let your Justice revenge me upon him and in the afflictions of your frowns,
teach him to feel those pains he inflicts upon others


Rise, Fidelia, and believe Palantus can never deserve this; he knows me too
well to venture his Passions beyond his thoughts; and I will rather be unjust
to him, then prove unkind to thee; and when thy griefs have let thee collect
thy thoughts, this secret I gave thee even now, must remove all thy feats; for
know, I have a guest here lodged by Fate, and so proud he will dwell alone and
reign sole Monarch of this Breast; And trust me, gentle Fidelia, I am proud
too, and scorn a part or corner of a Heart; and he, who ere he be that will be
mine, must bring an entire Friendship no divided breast, a Province will not
satisfy me; It Is a solitary Heart that affects crowds of Lovers; In love alone
is best company, absolute or nothing in a Heart, if I be one


Those that err having such a guide must fall unpitied; O Madam, did I hope
this sad day such joy as this? No, no, this change of my condition confirms me
in the uncertainty they build upon that trust to Fortune, who afraid to be
thought she loves any one thing long, made me fear she had now designd my
Ruin; whom she so long indulged with the Friendship of two such persons as
your Highness and Palantus, to show 'twas she, not Virtue raised me; I cannot
yet pretend to the least of your Highness favors, being but the youngest child
of Love and Fortune; and can plead but from your pity no interest, nor no
inheritance in eithers blessings


Fortune nor Love shall make me forsake thee; and for Love, though I find his
venom in my Mind, yet this truth I dare proclaim, that god has no partial
customs to difference his Children by. Love has not elder Rights, all are his
Heirs that Love with Faith and Honor: This strange madness that afflicts my
Mind, call it what you will, Love or madness, to dote upon a shadow, though it
has depth and stream enough to bear me with it; Yet all this Tempest in my
Mind has raised no Billows there; no faulty desires, nor dangerous vanity
waits upon my Love: This shadow of one, is all men to me; like wealth
contracted into Jewels, so I bear the precious load here. -- See who


Yes, Madam, and I can give little hope of better days, till the sword decide
the difference; The Prince and Palantus are upon their March this way, but the
dissorders are such we dare not attend his coming; for the King is informed
that the people will this night force the Palace, how easy it will be to do it
I will not counsel the King to make a trial especially when we consider the
consequence; His guards, though faithful, are too few to conquer, and too many
to sacrifice; Therefore the King has resolved with them to make his retreat
this Evening to Aversa, whose strength and affections he dares rely upon, it is
in the way the Prince must march; to whom notice is already gone, and private
instructions to those that are faithful in this Calamity, to make that their
Rendezvous


The Gods are still with us; and to dispute their Actions; were to incense
them, our obedience prevails more then complaints. What are his Majesty's
Commands to me? How shall I dispose of my self in these disorders


The King, whose chief fear and trouble is your Highness safety, desires your
Company this night with him in some disguise, to prevent any accident; to which
your Person (as your self) may be subject; habited like a boy, he thinks will
be best he knows; it will seem strange to your Highness to change your Sex; but
his command and necessity will be excuse for both


My obedience shall in all things possible serve his will; A man's habit! I have
none, you must provide it, who shall go with me? Has the King appointed any


In this, and all difficulties, my Life and Fortune shall be proud to bear a
part; And though I know I shall blush to see my self in that habit; yet to bear
a share in your Highnesses Fortune is an Honor I shall always covet


Welcome, Dear Fidelia; may thy kindness to me be as succesful, as I prophecy
thy Love will be; We now begin to tread that path, which though it be full of
thorns and horror, yet it leads Fidelia to Love and Honor


THe Woods are full of armed men; Troops of gallant youths pass by me without
regard; Me-thoughts a scorn flew from every generous Heart and sparkling Eye,
to see such sloth and degenerate youth lie hid in this peaceful shape of mine,
when all the world is in Arms; And my Heart tells me, it were as easy to
circumvent them, as a Lion; and as little danger to kill their Tyrant Prince,
as to strike a Boar with this trusty spear; Leopoldo, he is their General;
They say his Father killed our king, murdered our Princes, and banished my
Father, who has often bid me hate him; And now 'twere easy with a well aimed
Arrow to lay his Pride upon the earth in the height of all his glories; such a
quarry would make a Hunts-man proud, and find matter fit for story; But down,
down all thoughts of my Revenge till he bids strike who knows why and when it is
fit; till then, be quiet, all the troubles of my Heart be gone; and here let
Pollidor rest contented in this Cave, where thou were bred and born; Here we
live unknown, un-envied, and as free from danger as the glory of this world;
This Cave none will fight for sure; 'twas the Habitation of a Satyr, and he
has given us leave to possess it; it is the Charity of a kind of Beast, whose
Love to my Sister is beyond the faith of men, and strange as any accident in
our Fortune; She sent him home from hunting with the Venison we killed; and
under the notion of serving her the poor Beast is to all of us a Servant


There Is no body within, yet all things are in order, and all absent; I cannot
but wonder where they should be thus late. -- Oh, here


For the bright Maid, she is gazing, like one that were planet-struck, upon
those new kind of men that fill the Woods; I never saw a Mind so soon
reconciled to her fears; at first sight she shrunk, and leaned to me till she
blushed, and then bent her brows and bow too, and then gazed again; They
laughed to see her in this disorder, but she pursues them still, without regard
to my cries or prayers; and walks as if her Mind were grown greater from the
sight: And though my business calls me hither, I was loath to leave her, for
fear they should hurt her; Prithee, good Master, seek her, and chide her home,
you will find her by the great plains side; where the sacred Oak with the
Trophies stands


Well, I Will seek her; and if my Father returns and ask for me, tell him whither
I am gone


I love them not, yet I dare not hurt them; for my Love says, she shall die if
they be hurt, else I would poison them, I know a root will do it; But I love
the Maid, so sweet a Flower never decked Pan's Garland; her Voice charms the
wildest Breast, and her touch cures all wounds but those of the Mind. This Cave
was mine, by Birth mine, Ages we have lived in it; 'Twas Pan's gift of old, yet
I gave it to my Love but to smile upon me; My Sire was worshipped in these
woods, and lies buried under yon Altar; I cry sometimes when I miss him; seven
tedious


FRom Gaietta we are assured of a considerable force to Join with us to morrow;
And it is believd we shall find the King about the Forest; for the Prince and he
are met; and what number, Clytus, do you judge their Army to be now they are
united


The Scouts speak of many thousands more then the King expected, or I believed
would follow his Fortune; but all makes not two thirds of our present Army,
besides those of Gaietta, which will this night lodge in the Forest


Was it for certain, the Princess Bellamira fled in Boys Habit, as was
reported


For certain; and I confess I cannot but lament her part in this Calamity; for
she has ever born a Mind full of Honor, and upon all occasions been ready to
assist them that misfortunes made fit for her Charity


But she gave an unhandsome answer to my Prince, whose Love in a profer'd
Marriage (mentioned by chance by a friend, as a means to compose the present
troubles, in Policy as well well as Civility) might have found a handsomer
denial then the upbraids of Traitor and Usurper


Observe him, Roderigo.


Ha! does your mind run that way? is that the fair pretense of restoring our
lost Princes? this I doubted before, but it was too late to prevent it


Her pride may fall into my power, and then I shall give an answer like her
message; till then let us intend our business, which a woman shall never be
with Almanzor


Roderigo, a word. -- Now you find the Declaration was well designed, and
before they shall find a power to disprove the truth whether their Prince be in
our power or no, I will make these Traitors cut themselves. This Clytus is a
villain, and begins to grow cold, he likes not the marriage with the Princess;
therefore strike that string no more. -- Clytus, how do the people take the
news of their young Kings safety


With joy, Sir; and with impatient longing they expect the sight; and it is my
opinion 'twill be the best way to produce him this day, and present him to the
Army; if we should delay their expectations, perhaps we may lose their
affections and their faith too; and then we have only armed and drawn together
a multitude that may, for their revenge, join with the enemy; who when he shall
hear of their discontents will not neglect to play the best of his Game; it is
therefore again my counsel to lose no time, but produce the King


It is his own desire not to be discovered till things be settled, at least till
the Castles and strong places be surrendered, for the better security of his
person


Besides, it is now most dangerous to produce him; his enemies and Fathers
murderers being in arms, and ready to dispute his title by a day of Battle; in
which if he miscarry he is not only lost in this, but in all future hopes of a
revenge: but if Gaietta will receive him, and a Garrison for his safety, or you
Clytus give up the Castles in Naples for his use; then the Prince shall upon
his word and honor produce your King; else, till the Battle be over, without
breach of faith, he cannot expose his friend to such a visible ruin


If the people will be satisfied with this, I am; Sir, you know by the
contract, Naples was to be in my command, which I possessed in right of my
Master; Sicily (as 'twas agreed) was resigned to you; and if I refuse, now, to
deliver the Castles of Naples, it is not to keep out my King that makes me do
it, but to be sure who shall be my King when I have done it; for it is no
question, Sir, when you have the strength of the Kingdom in your hands, and an
Army master of the Field, it is most easy to show who shall be King of the
Country; but if you are a Prince in soul as well as fortune, you will scorn to
deceive our trust; and if there be foul play in your heart, small and
despicable as our Force are, we shall yet with that venture to call you Enemy


How now? what is the news?


The party that pursued the King last night are beaten in, and the commanded
men that were sent to the Pass at Capua are cut off by a party of the Kings,
who now appears upon the hills, where he possesses the places to his most
advantage; and the Officers expect your Highness Orders


Come Clytus, let no jealousy nor fear afflict thee; but take the word of a
Prince, I shall be fair and real in all things. Every man to his command; and
(if it be possible) join with those of Gaietta; I confess I did not expect to
be called to the Battle, 'twas my fear they would fly us; and, but that I
believe their despair rather then courage makes them seek us, 'twould startle
me; but here let us part like fellows in arms, and men of one interest,
faithfully act our parts. (Genorio King) that is the word; and if a misfortune
find us, let Mola be the R^ndevouz, from whence we may retreat to Gaietta


I never feared an enemy before, nor till now doubted a day of Battle: these
traitors that are joined to us, methinks I see a curse even in their looks; how
can the gods fight for treason? would they were all sunk


This I feared; but to prevent it was not possible; that the young King lives
may be truth, but that he is either in his power or knowledge, I fear is as
false as he is; but I am now too far engaged; else he should find Clytus drew
his sword upon another account then to make Almanzor King


AN Army! -- I never saw so glorious a sight before. -- There is a beauteous
horror in it, Their very looks command fate; where dares there be any thing so
bold, as to declare it self an enemy to such a body, if the soul be answerable
to the limbs? sure, Armies are the pride of nature, and her enemies too. There
is a strange sweetness in their Music; yet their Trumpets curdles my blood,
and my heart's grown too great for my breast; this Cottage grows too narrow for
my mind


See where she is.


Oh Father, I have seen the Army; it is the most bewitching sight the Sun e're
showed my eyes; there is at once a beauty and a terror in it, and makes me love
and envy those that command such things; how came you to leave being a
Soldier? methinks death only should have made a separation 'twixt you and
such a body; it moves with such a Majesty I was afraid at first; but now the
awe is not unpleasing, my fear is turned into wonder and admiration; did
Pollidor imagine it such a thing? this is the first my Brother ever saw


It Is so, Phillora; but I have read of many.


So have I, dully and coldly described; of their Battles too ill fought and
worse painted in story, presented still by their fears, or partiality of some
weak Historian, who delivers them still in their crimes and miseries, like love
known only by the scars, while the crafty happy ones (as they say) jealous of
their wealth and envyed blessings, conceal their coveted happiness; and
methinks we might do something worth story in this approaching day, that
foretells so much honor to them that dare meet this storm; and I know not what
it is that prompts me, but my heart longs to see what fate attends this Army;
will my Brother go


When thou shall know, gentle Phillora, who commands this Army; what Tyranny,
Oppression, Usurpation it protects; and that no hand there but wars against the
gods, thou will then hate and loathe them which thou now admirest, who guard
that great ill man that destroyed his Brother, killed his Children, and now
usurps his throne, to revenge which the people are armed, and now has forced
him to defend his ill-got greatness; to side with whom is no less then to war
with heaven: but these as too distant and general ills I will not oppose. But
when thou shall call to mind thy Fathers banishment, withering here under his
oppression; thy self and Pollidor buried in these obscure Woods, that owe to
the world a better account of their days then this sollitude can pay, you will
then find other thoughts; yet I am pleased to see this impatiency in thy mind;
but the time is not yet ripe, in which upon a just and honest cause, your
swords and minds will have use of your best resolutions to bear your parts. The
business is laid, and in Gaietta our Scene lies; but till these troops are past
pray, let us retire and lie close till our friends, which are their enemies,
appear; and then we'll join, to their destruction. The Prince Leopold I hear
commands the Army


Is it not our King, and the Prince, you speak of, Sir?


Yes, but Murder and Usurpation has made him so.


And may we fight against him? sure it is a strange justice you would seem to
put in execution; sure such crimes were not appointed to punish crimes; do you
believe it such a fault in him to defend himself against a Brother, then turned
enemy? and no sin in us to arm against our King, whose succession is undoubted
now his Brother is dead, fallen under a ruin he made himself; for I have heard
you say, he was slain in Battle; why did you then defend him no better? it is
vain to think what heaven thought not just then in the person of the King (who
you would have me believe thus wicked) should punish their own act in the
person of the innocent Prince: but suppose the King as guilty as you would make
him; what has the Prince done, then a Child? why do you war with him? whose
virtue neither your rage nor hatred can deny; for to my self you have often
given him divine honor; Oh, Sir, your silence is more noble then your hate;
and lest I may be seduced to lose my loyalty, or my duty, in this dispute, I Will
retire


This is a language I cannot but wonder at, from Phillora; have the injuries of
a Father no greater place? is all my care and love paid with this unjust sense
of my misery


Sir, those grounds you laid of truth and piety in my heart when I was young,
that seed bears this fruit; would you have me to obey your passion, hate my
King, and prefer your anger before all the gods you made me bow too? and not
only wish, but join in the ruin of the Prince, who your soul knows has no
guilty share in the least of our misfortunes? you know, Sir, there can be no
interest but honor that moves me to say this, for the Prince is one I never
saw


What crimes must he act ere you believe him guilty? go, court with your youth
and beauty those armed troops which you thus dote upon, follow till your
dishonor has made you a quarrel; there are those will not ask twice the
pleasures they can force


This from Pollidor, for desiring to be worth his love! I rather expected to
have found that fire which age has quenched in our father, should have
inflamed thy generous breast to have joined with me in the search of honor;
methinks thou should be ashamed to look on, and see these Armies bleed, and
with a revenge thou dare not take


You are angry, Phillora; you would not thus mistake my kindness else.


My anger is to see Pollidor can consent, with shame, to lie hid in this
glorious day of danger, and endure this private life, and thus sleep away thy
days, when honor is upon the wing, and Armies striving to catch her; who
hovers over the world, searching only some glorious front to light upon; does
fear or pale envy hold thee back? if thou think thy self a gallanter man
then the Prince, prove thy fate upon him; it is womanish to shoot at him with
wishes, or hope to blast his youth with curses; if my words wrong thee lead the
way, give me the lie in that motion; or blushing follow me; while a Girl leads
Pollidor to arms and honor


Needs Phillora more Arguments that I love her! if she does, let her read this
patience


What means this fury? will you expose your self to dangers, only to be talked
of? what honor can you hope in this attempt? come Phillora, let us retreat,
and upon our knees make our war; an old man and a maid must find their ends in
prayer


I find other thoughts fire my mind; Fortune thy coy Deity I will worship; and
if thou smilest I Will build thee Altars; if not, when I am old, and my mind
grown heavy, then I Will listen to those dull Customs that our thoughtless Sex
obey, which perhaps will lead me to the quiet privacy of this place; but I have
yet too much fire, Sir, to be enclosed by Custom, or Pale fears. Woman, and
all those nice follies, and shaking heart, that use to possess our soft Sex, as
things unknown and unpractised, I put off with my Coats; and thus, as I was
wont to search the Game, so will I hunt my fortune; The spoilers of thy herds I
have often made my prey: A Bore or a Lion I start not at, you have taught me
know they were created my Inferiors; and with these spears we have not only
made them our sport, but our food too; That I am a woman is no fault of mine,
which Custom (a second and better Nature) has, (I thank you) redeemed, by
giving me great thoughts, and weeding out, by your philosophy, all the little
low affections that would choke our minds, and learned me to despise all the
fond false Doctrine that cunning men would insinuate into us, designing all our
Sex their Slaves


Your anger, Phillora, comes in still, to justify all your errors; yet give
me leave to say your Anger's more naked then any other passion; for angry
women, like drunken men, are neither to be valued, nor punished; which
privilege e're I would plead, I Will suffer the penalty of any crime both those
faults are subject to


No, Pollidor, it is not anger, but my reason that speaks this; my eyes and
heart are open, and the things I see those I speak; Interest nor hope of any
flattery shall bind my tongue; Tell not me our Sex cannot modestly be angry,
and that a maid enraged is an uncomely sight; that wounds add not to her beauty
either given or received, We must only frown, forsooth, or lament our
Injuries. Hence with all those Impostures, and such whose folly or faint souls
will be subject to this Doctrine; while the several passions of your Rage or
Lust impose upon us, who like your chained slaves must not only submit our
selves and honors, but our Reason too, referring all our griefs and Injuries
to the justice of the gods; which when Pollidor sees Phillora suffer, let him
and all mankind despise me, and stamp slave upon my forehead. -- Honor, thou
Diety of both Sexes, Thou male and female virtue, let thy power look friendly
on my youth; Guide my feet this day to follow my heart in the paths thou
leadest, and I will have -- A glorious life, or else a handsome grave


Will you leave us then, and thus throw behind you all the kindness of a Father
and a Brother? has the place no tie upon your grateful Nature? has my love and
conversation (besides a Brothers Interest in your blood) gained no place in
Phillora's heart


Yes, yes, ever dear Pollidor, they have, they have; and know, I leave not this
place, because my fond will arrects a change, nor am I ungrateful to this place
in which thou taught'st me those rules of Love and Honor, whose great Examples
(though yet no Lover) I now begin to imitate; and Pollidor shall find me ready
to pay all those debts when Love and Honor calls; and for this dear Cave, this
beloved Cell, thus I take a sad and kind Farewell; with tears I part from thee;
and for the blessed protection we have found in th


our retreat to this hill, from whence we fled yesterday, must breed some doubt
of the cause; for it must seem strange to find themselves sought by those men
to day which fled them last night; Besides, your Highness knows, Their Army is
composed of diverse Interests, which will make them jealous of each other; and
reasonably enough apprehend we have some intelligence in their Army, which time
can only satisfy, and may join to them the doubtful part, which expect but
the fortune of a day, to declare for the Conqueror; We can hope no more then we
are; every day will increase them, both in number and repute; therefore my
counsel is, to offer them Battle, while we are in lust, and hope of victory;
delay will but abate the Soldiers hearts, and then it is easy to master the
Limbs


I confess, you have reason; and Arcus shall return my sense of it to the King,
and desire him to send my Sister, and the Baggage to Capua, there to attend our
success


What says your Letters?


They mention some disorders among the Rebels in Naples; But this fatal Paper
makes their Army dangerous; it is my Sisters dream expounded by the old Hermit,
it is sent me by Fidelia; there read her letter, thou will find something that
concerns thee, whilst I rest me here


Your Highness walk by the Seaside in a quiet Evening.
Signifies, the peace and security drawing to an end will be
Interrupted by the unconstancy of the People; For the Evening
Signifies the conclusion of a happiness.
And the cloud that landed a Knight in Foreign habit, who
Kicked up the sand in your Faces, in a dangerous proportion;
Signifies a foreign Invasion, which discontents will
Countenance; for Raising the dust is raising the people, whose
Hieroglyphique Sand and dust are, Flying in your Faces, is
Rebellion, which knows no bound, nor respect;
Your being angry, and not able to revenge the injuries,
Foretells this Rebellion will be powerful.
The flying from the Dust, and loss of the King, in it;
My fears apprehend his loss in this Rebellion;
Your succor in a wood, where shepherds beat down the dust, with boughs.
Signifies a happy relief in the faith and loyalty of the Country
People. Trees, being the Hieroglyphique of Loyalty.
And the extravagant desires of the Shepherds, who importune the
Prince and your Highness to the marrying of two Trees, affirming
Else that the dust and danger would return again,
Signifies, that by some Miraculous manner your Highness
Must fix the peoples hearts.

How now! what do thou seek! who gave thee this wound? why this fear and
wonder


Seed of gods, or the god of War himself, what e're thou be, Thus I adore
thee, thus I implore thy aid; tell me but where thy Altars stand, I Will haste
and fetch a Lamb, and sacrifice him to thee, my great deliverer


Rise poor wretch, and cease to fear, or worship; there is neither due here; We
are mortal as thou art; yet if any Injury threaten thee, we will protect thee;
how the poor wretch trembles! prithee, Palantus, help to draw the Arrow; how
came you by this Shot


From a fair and cruel Foe, Divinest, A maid of heavenly Form, brighter then
the Evening Star, lovely as the Syrinx our great gods Paramour, straight as
young hazel wands, or the Cornel Darts by Diana thrown; and far the Nymph
out-shines all her train


Well, and what of her? The poor thing loves.


Love? yes, yes, love, so they call my pain; it is a grief grows here -- Beloved
of -- gods, here, I sucked the Venom at my Eyes; and my old Master says 'twill
never be cured


And is it troublesome, your pain?


Troublesome? The Plague or Famine, or the wild Wolfs tooth, wounds not like
it; My mind is all afire. -- Great, and blessed, did thy happy soul never feel
the thirst that beauty breeds


Never; and I wonder how thou come thus miserable; by my life, Palantus, he
tells me more of Love and his power then some Poets feign


Never Love? Why what do you do all day? how do you spend your thoughts? My
very Dreams are Love, my Sinews shrink when she frowns; sure she is a Witch,
there is such Magic in her Eyes; My flock I Will pawn against a Dog, you will
like and love her too, it is such a Divine form; it is not thy Army, nor thy Arms
can guard thee from her


Do thou know her? what is she?


Yes, yes, in this wood she lives, and has done from her mothers breast; her
father and her brother are my masters (but I serve none but her,) My Sire gave
them his Cave to live in, we were bred together, and yet unkind she seeks to
destroy me


Who are her Father and her brother?


Strange men, and hold strange Opinions, of Names and Places, of pains for
ever, Divinest, and talk of Gods, and their rods, above Pan and his
punishments; which wild things too they threaten, of being nothing, Master,
and yet last ever, and call all that I desire, by nature taught, a fault


What urged her to wound you thus?


I found her sleeping in yonder Grove, and would have stolen a kiss; seven
Summers here have I worn this wastful fire in my suffering breast without a hope
of rest, and yet she threw me from her, called me Beast, and bent her Bow; yet
I have seen her kiss her Brother's Dog a thousand times


I swear she is very unreasonable to despise thee, and be so kind to a Dog.


But I hanged him for it.


'T was wisely done to remove your Rival; but you forget your wound, does it
not smart


The unkindness does, and she is ungrateful too; for would I have sought a Maid
amongst our own kind, she that has the curledst Horns and crooked'st Thighs
would have been proud of me; for, despised as I am, there is no subject of our
Master Pan can hunt, climb, or outrun me, none surer with his Bow or Dart,
none feller with his Club, or bolder in his heart, allied to Pan; my breast too
is broad, smoother hoofs, nor wealthier fleece clothes no Satyr's things; these
unshorn Curls from my birth I wear, they cut theirs (Master) that are poor;
these gilded Horns were hers too, the first fruits of her brow, an earlier
Musen none casts than she, and thousands wait upon her smile; but she will have
none but me, that pine for this cruel scorn


Has she a Father and a Brother, say you?


Yes, great Master, and here they live, converse with none; sure some sad
misfortune or great guilt hangs upon them, for they are always sad


How do they spend their time?


They read and hunt, I taught them: we have this day slain a Bore and a Lion,
divine Phillora wears the Spoil: Their Father too is old, and gray as Winter,
but stout as young Lions, wise as Oracles, pious too as Pan's Priest; he has
been injured, he says, by a King of men; I hear him talk of mighty things --
But hark, I hear her Horn, with that she calls her Brother; I dare not see her


Step behind, let me meet your danger.


This way I Am sure he took, he cannot fly far, my Arrow found him; for by his
lustful blood I have track'd him to this place -- I see the Villain


How they gaze upon each other! thus did I look, thus wonder, and then grew
sick in my mi^^^^ her eyes are fixed, she minds me not; I Will seek my safety
first* and then dispute my Crime


Ha! do you glory in this wile? but know, it is only deferring of thy doom.


Gentle Maid, may we know the reason of this War?


Naught, great Master, but my loving her.


If that be a Crime, where have you seen that dull thing that either could or
would be innocent? By all the diverse troubles of my mind, one sight of that
divine form has surpised a strength here that never feared a woman's power till
now -- Here


Ha! Why do I gaze thus? -- What have I seen? -- Is it a God or a Man? -- Such
a Figure my eyes never saw before -- How far he out-shines my Brother! -- The
Pride and Opinion of my self too, those withered Leaves I feel fall from my
heart -- There Is no such Glass as perfect Excellency in others for Pride to see
and hate her self in -- O that I had been born blind, or could tear these
Traitors out that thus have robbed me of my content and peace of mind, to both
which Farewell for ever -- What is it that stops me? Something calls me back,
my fond heart would


She is gone, and all joys go with her.


And all my fears; yet I love even that anger in her eyes.


'Twas a strange accident, who can this Maid be? it is some delusion sure.


The Prince is troubled; pray Sir, leave your wonder, and strive to divert your
thoughts: This figure calls to mind the Shepherd in the Princesses Dream, the
Sex only differs


There Is more than ordinary accident in this; See how his eyes are fixed. I Will
speak to him; Sir, Sir, your Highnesses mind is so intent upon this Girl you
do not hear the Trumpet, Sir, whose call tells us, Something like Danger
threatens; something worthy your presence, and your thought calls away


Did thou see her Palantus? The Arcadian Nymphs that boast their sable eyes,
white-wristed Juno, Venus, or the Goddess that Woods affects, no nor the
Virgin-Deity, she that bears both Shield and Spear, and has eyes that farther
wound, yet all their united Graces (though we bow to them) outshine not this
Flower of the Wood; And thou God of hearts stop this Fate, either call back or
bless thy flying Dart; cure mine, or touch her heart. -- Come hither, do thou
know this Maid, and the place of her abode


Yes, yes, I know thy pain too, feared of men; there is a Fever in thy breast,
a fire that all the Herbs in the Wood cannot cure, nor Streams of these
Meadows quench


I must find this Maid though thousand Difficulties oppose; it is the very
Figure in my Sisters Dream. -- O Bellamira, thy prophetic soul has foreseen
all our Troubles both of mind and body


Pray, Sir, forget not the business that now stays for us, two Armies in
Battalia, two Kingdoms in dispute, your Fathers safety, your Life and Honor,
all at stake; will you throw all these by to follow a fantasy, the shadow of
a shadow, one like to nothing, seen in another Dream? Me thinks these Dangers
and Duty which are at hand should remove all those light thoughts from your
heart; Pardon this freedom, Sir, it is my affection speaks


Prithee Peace, Father and Sister are empty names, Virtue and Honor, and all
the Gods must fly Leopoldo, or make my way fit to the enjoying this lovely
Maid: My soul is sick, I know not of what Disease, but sudden and deadly as the
Plague; The Infection struck me, Honor and Virtue be still Leopoldo's Guides,
and cease to take pleasure in opposing his happiness with your difficulties;
it is not the distance else between a Crown and a Shepherd shall divide us


Art thou a Prince?


Yes, and one, if thou can serve in my love, will make thee happy; my soul
longs to enjoy the friendship of this lovely Maid


Enjoy her? She will not be touched, Heavens, Fire, and Time, will be touched
and stayed as soon as she, if she thought you imagined such a hope


Thou mistak'st me, I dare as soon attempt my Fathers life as stain her chaste
bosom with any faulty desires


Away Dissembler, I see thy aim; thou a Prince? It Is false; Where Is the virtue
that set thee above a world of men? Thou art the Satyr, sure; though thou have
cast thy Horns and Hoofs thou art more a Beast than I. Fool that I was, did I
kneel to thee, Abuser of the Gods; Most ingrate, did they give thee this form
and power to betray men, and pollute Virgins? Defend me! thou Wretch, would
thou make me accessory to the abusing of the thing I love better than my soul,
or thou love thy self


Hold, fond Beast, hold, and be gone; your honest ignorance, Sir, defends you.


And so it shall do still against such impious Greatness; if I durst but see my
Love I Would home, and tell her what a Villain a Prince may be.


Why in such haste? I Will ease you of your Club; Have you found a remedy for
your arm yet? -- This strange Accident amazes all my thoughts; This Wretch too,
to find such a noble anger upon a thought of force being offered to his Love:
There Is nothing in this day but miracle; something, sure, great and high as the
persons designed in this Tragedy, the Gods are busy to deliver to the world;
for it is no common birth that Nature and Nations thus labors with, which makes
me with patience bear those throws that afflict my heart, whose desperate love,
though a lo ser of all those hopes I had at stake, makes me resolved silently
to look on, and see this Game played


Prithee, Arcus, let our Rival go; and when thou see the maid tell her, if I
outlive this day I Will find her, and doubt not my love shall be less commanded
then I would my self be obeyed; here, bind his arm in this Scarf, Arcus; and
then haste to my Sister, tell her she must instantly for Capua; and assure the
King I


If my heart can judge she loves this Gay Man, then she will be glad of this
Scarf, I Will give it her and she shall forgive me; when I can please her my
heart rejoices; but she never thinks of poor little me but to grieve my heart.


THis strange chance that Arcus relates makes me fear some sudden issue of my
Dream; he describes a Maid, whose beauty took my Brother in an hour when his
heart was most opposite to love; and by the habit and the place only her sex
differs; for his description most lively paints that shadow which my Dream has
thus long enjoyed; ye gods, if it be your will in Riddles still to wrap your
secrets, we mortals can only say Amen. But why do I let this lesser thought
fill my breast; when Countries ruin and the death of my dear Father (the great
part of my fear, or ought to be) past by unmourn'd? sure there is a reason for
this fault; this weakness has its cause; something that my mind does yield to,
prevails; yet I find not my Reason overcome, though there is something in this
gentle fear I know not what to call it: I never yet felt love by what I observe
of him in others; yet I begin to fear he is knocking at my breast, and would
fain get in; sure it is he, for I was never till now so near being a Lover as
the fear of it. But I must still these noises in my thoughts; for a Virgins
innocence is so coy, so jealous, and so gentle too, she need not take the pains
to beat it from her heart; she may think that and her peace away. Therefore,
Bellamira, wisely in time correct thy thoughts, and suffer them not to play
with this dangerous god, lest the sport prove earnest, lest the child thou
play'st with grows too strong for Reason; and from innocent thoughts becomes
unruly passions. Fidelia, though she knows all but my fears, yet I now begin to
blush, because there is something like my Love, whilst 'twas self, yet it is
something now that my passion builds upon; and that newness, though no fault,
is yet unconquered in my mind; and I cannot yet tell her this new stranger
thought, though she know all the other secrets of my heart


Arcus says, since he left the Prince he saw a Shepherd in age and clothes so
like the Maid, that he believes it must be her Brother; and from this sight
concludes your safeties near; for why should we find the evil part, and not the
good prove true, of that fatal Dream


Ha! what coldness is this? -- What trembling? -- What paleness? this confusion
of mind, what means it? -- This joy and fear, this mingled nameless passion, of
all passions composed. -- What art thou, or what would thou be? -- Why this
violence on a Maids heart? -- Be but honor, and wear what danger, what form,
thou will command, and I Will obey thee


She Is strangely troubled; I never saw her thus before: Madam, has my news
displeased you


No, no, Fidelia; my heart has troubles which thy joys to find some ease for me
has overseen, whilst the greatest and saddest part of that fatal Dream; the
King, Fidelia, the good, the kind, the valiant old King, my friend and Father,
must in this dust be lost; remember that; what joy then can a safety bring when
we cannot hope our victory at a less rate then his precious life


Your pardon, Madam; the Princes love, and strange passage of the Satyr, your
interest, and hope of future good, made me forget that piety and pity was due
to the King


Prithee, Fidelia, love, but do not pity us; for my part, though their ruin
threaten, yet I despise a pity; nor is it due to my fortune; for I am not
miserable so ordinary a way, as to be relieved with so cheap a remedy; and were
the King safe thou should find me resolved, though not contented; and other
joy then that resolution I cannot promise to my self; yet if I could be
satisfied with such joys as affect others, I might esteem my self blessed; But my
mind, Fidelia, is too severe to be taken with such shallow happiness as I see
most women pursue, who affect the noise and vanity of the world, whose bubbles
deceive and slave the most of women


See, Madam, here is Arcus; let him now describe the Maid, whose beauty he said
was equal to all that ever his eye saw


Pardon me, Madam; my heart and reason make one exception.


Arcus is kind to beauty, and where ere he meets admires it; but what does the
noble Arcus think is beauty? if his eyes choose what is valued in his Country,
there is nothing amongst us he can approve of


'Twas our curse to be born in that Country, Madam; and that slavery which at
first I lamented, I now rejoice in as the means to make me able to distinguish
between good and bad; for beauty, it is my contrary, what is not like me is
beautiful; this is the shame and brand of nature; the curse of an incensed
deity lives in our black


You Are cruel to the color; and I rather think, like divine Bellessa, beauty,
afraid of injuries, or in revenge of that inconstancy she has found in men,
has thrown off red and white; and to live safe from the vanity and perjury of
both sexes has made this retreat into black for her security


Madam, the story of our change is common; and the Poet tells whose curse we
bear in our faces; no such reason as your Highness in your goodness imagines,
whose charity would persuade us we might yet find acceptance when we loved; but
it is too sad a truth, that for the sin of one coy Daphne all our Nation mourns;
that froward Girl incensed Apollo's rage, and in revenge of her scorn thus he
brands us all, lest our Country should again boast a face, that he might love;
yet this good I find from my black; all people boldly praise me; and it is such
an impossibility to believe any body can love it, that even your Highness will
venture to defend it, and safely may; for 'twill beget no man's jealousy nor
woman's envy


But if Arcus will find the Prince, and tell him how fain his Sister would see
him before the Battle, and certainly inform himself whether these two Shepherds
are really in nature, or only walking Dreams


Bellamira will owe him more then praise, or thanks can pay.


'Twas his Highness Order I should expect him here, yet I shall not fail to
obey your command, though betwixt this and the Prince the enemy has placed a
Guard which I must pass through; for to go about I fear will be too long for
your Highness to expect my return


No, it is enough, we will expect his coming; I did not know there was a danger in
the Pass; nor will we venture Ar-Arcus, whose faith shall be reserved for
greater trusts then to be thrown away upon this common one; if I doubted his
heart or love to my Brother, he should go; and I Would prefer my curiosity before
him; but to let Arcus see I value his faith, I shall still preserve him as he
has done it


Madam, now I beg upon my knees your commands; and either you doubt my heart or
faith, whose readiness to serve you you shall find as constant as my color; my
life and freedom I value only as the gift of your generous Brother; and your
goodness has made me such a continued happiness, and so far above my merit, I
am fain to trust to the report of others ere I can believe I was ever
miserable; my birth in my Country I am not ashamed of, though I am of my
fortune; to redeem which, if your Highness shall fear to command or expose me,
I shall rather think you doubt, me then that you have any fears for me. For
know, Madam, I cannot be satisfied, nor count my self a grateful receiver of
this freedom, but when I expose that and my self to serve you


When I have a danger worthy of him he shall be sure to find the trust, and my
prayers with it: but since my Brother desires it, whose love has sent him about
me, pray expect him here; for this Letter says, you and old Philemon must
accompany us to Capua; and should you miscarry, our sex and ignorance of the
place may throw us into many dangers. -- Sure there is more in this man then
his humble heart yet shows: such guests as honor, faith and courage would not
lodge in so mean a Cottage as a private slave, unless benighted, or to avoid
storms. Good heaven, what fortune do we see dealt to some men, as if justice
had no power nor voice in heaven! -- Well, Arcus, if we live to see this storm
blown over, I shall very unwillingly be denied a better knowledge of your
fortune; for it is not this cloud, nor this night that hangs upon thy forehead;
nor those chains thou lately putt'st off can hide thy mind; it still shows
something too great for those misfortunes to pretend to


Heaven hide his mercies when I hide a thought from the divine Bellamira; my
story, Madam, when your Highness has leisure to wonder at the averseness of
fortune, and would allay your own joys, then you shall know it: for that is a
story has tasted of all kind of changes; and my miseries shall serve for your
diversion, Madam; in which nothing lies heavier upon my heart then the loss of
a friend; which since my being a slave in Cyprus I could never hear of; and by
me you may learn what custom can; do for my heart has of late been so beaten
with afflictions they are grown natural to me


See, see; Arcus, who is come to decide the difference? Oh, my Brother! what
new strange misery is this! Arcus has filled my heart with fear and wonder; the
truth of my dream makes me tremble too, with the apprehension of the Kings
danger


O Bellamira, my distracted soul is grown weary of this habitation; the new and
many strokes that fortune has given of late makes me even turn coward, and
yield to her malice; methinks all she can do, or virtue hope for, is not worth
the dispute; I would I had lost all she aims at so I were dead, or in some
place forgotten and unknown to any but the gods


I will not compare my griefs with my Brother's; but sure if I did you would pity
me, and not add your troubles to them; I hear you have seen a Maid in the
Woods, and such a beauty as the Court never showed you; and I have got a Lover
too, I was sending now to acquaint you with the person, and his propositions. I
can conclude this war without a stroke, at least the Spanish Prince tells me
so: it is only marrying him, and quitting my Father; and dear Leopoldo; this is
all I am to do, and I shall prove how much he loves me even in this my
desperate estate


This from the false usurper? what answer sent you back?


I bad the Messenger return him, I never saw that man I would marry, nor any
one whose company I preferred before my Brothers; but if there were a necessity,
and my choice free, the meanest Gentleman in all his Army that wore a sword,
and had not lost his honor, my soul would prefer before him, even in this
height of all his pride and power, that could believe my heart so degenerate to
let it self be embraced by the destroyer of my Country, and murderer of my
Family


Spoke like my Sister, I never hated an enemy before; had love or ambition
fairly armed his men, or desire to have got fame upon us, such a choice honor
would have pleaded for; and I could have fought with him, and loved him too:
but this treacherous pride and covetousness are too low things and too mean
instruments for the gods to use, even when they have decreed a Monarchs ruin.
Thunder, Famine, Sword or Pestilence, are nobler far; sure we shall blush at
our fall from this mean hand. -- See, Fidelia's engaged, let us leave her; I
have something to tell thee ere I part; it is a new secret, Bellamira; but the
richest of my heart


You Will find nothing but truth in what I have said; that she loves, or at
least fears so, is as certain as that she cannot love you, which Love and
Fortune both has sent to afflict you in revenge of that scorn you have paid my
friendship


The figure of something seen in a Dream! the shadow of a shadow! this is a
fate as aerie as mine own, as hopeless, Nobody, or a Shepherd! as impossible
are her desires as mine; this being as much below her merit, as she is above
mine


Who knows their fate? their desperate passions make mine possible; I know it is
not common nor scarce honorable in Maids to woo; yet, methinks, I may tell
him that I love, if there be no more ill in the word then my desires or
thoughts aim at; I am sure I may with innocence enough, and when I have told
him so, if I lose a grain, or grow less in any one good, if I pluck one beauty
from a Virgins mind, let howlings find me, and may my crimes in sad repentance
unpitied fall in showers upon my cheeks; therefore armed with my innocence I am
resolved to prove fate further; for to the virtuous and the fairly daring
Fortune still holds out unlooked for success; and if mine be like my love, it
must prove better then my hopes


You are sad, Fidelia; is the Prince ready to depart?


Will you not go in and resolve your self? I know there is one from whom you
will take a most unwilling leave


Alas, Fidelia, there needs no circumvention to know all the secrets of my
heart; ask and take them, for the gentle Fidelia mistakes her friend, if she
thinks I have any wish that has a blush attending it; nor did I ever hide my
desires from her, but in kindness, being loath to let her see a sight might
trouble her


I cannot speak to him, my heart's too big to beg for love. -- Farewell,
Palantus; live and love all, but -- ('twill not out.)


Stay, gentle maid; it is true I love, I will not lie to thee, nor dare I tell
her whom I love; that truth, yet my wishes as no less innocent, then my hopes
desperate; and I wear the fire here, Fidelia, without a fault, and shall do
till I am earth; Yet my own despaires wound me not so much as Fidelia's, when I
consider her and Fate; and if thou will have patience thou shall see me revenge
thee on my self, decreed to such a misery as will not let me take the pleasure
of making thee happy, nor my self; Yet I conjure thee, Fidelia, strive with thy
Passion; and now thou know my Heart, let us smile some time when we meet
each other; a sullen sad Love looks as if it mourned some past sin, or
struggled yet to conquer some ill design


Malice and jealous Lovers make more serious search then death; and what I told
you even now was my fears rather then my wishes in thy Fortune; for know, my
Heart is too full of Friendship for Palantus to wish against him: And farther,
though I know all his desires are designed rewards for another, and thou
would see thy wishes enjoyed by one thou can not question, (being Rivaled
by a shadow,) yet I cannot blame thy Love; For Bellamira is an Excellence fit
for Heaven to covet: Nor does Palantus rejoice in those Excellencies more then
I, though her graces are to me as so many Enemies. Thus Fidelia, though
despised, will preserve her self fit for better Fortunes, by bearing this with
Honor


Sure there cannot be such a punishment in store for loving Bellamira as thy
kind fears apprehend; And since we have touched this string, whose harsh sound
I have long avoided for thy sake; Yet give me leave to say, Heaven and my
Friend can witness, I never made any vows to Fidelia; what I have done for her,
let the gods prove propitious to them and make us happy yet. And therefore, in
Justice, you cannot call me unconstant, or abuser of your Love. Gratitude (if
it were not too like vanity to say so) is all I ever could pay to thee; Not
that I would not have given more, but 'twas all I had left; This fatal fire
sent for my punishment, I fear, is either Child or Parent of that little god;
for till then, I never knew or scarce believed there was such a power; nor did
your own Heart desire a return of Love more then I have longed to give it you;
For I know, Honor in all the heights of excellency produces nothing more
glorious then a handsome Friendship: Other Virtues have him in pieces, but
entire Honor is in the perfect Love of two; which since we cannot enjoy as we
wish, yet you cannot accuse me of a crime which you have confessed your self;
Gentle Fidelia, though not at the same Altar, yet I bow to the same power that
leads thee in chains; nor will I be so barbarous as to employ thy Love to
advance my wishes with Bellamira, nor fear from thee such injustice as to do
ill Offices: Let our Friendship pity each other, and while we love with Honor
leave the rest to Fate; and thou shall find, though Love be binld, since he has
brought us to this precipice, (I prophecy) he will lend us his wings to save us


See, see, my Friend, how pleasing Truth is; when thou dissemblest even now,
and hid'st thy Love; Thy words came out unwillingly, and their harsh sounds
were forced through thy teeth, as if thy Tongue had haled them to suffer for
some crime they had committed: But now there is Music in them; and though the
Tune be sad, yet it is well set; and our Souls sometimes affects the serious and
the grave, as well as the jolly triumphant noise of victory; And since Palantus
values my Friendship, and looks with pity upon my sufferings, my Soul is at
peace; for can he do this and not love? What is that but Love? Give me this,
and take all the world besides: My Soul has not another wish in store, but that
my Friend may find his, and I a pardon for a fault he shall not know until I
have redeemed it; The Princess Bellamira too shall beg it for me


What fault can you be guilty of to me that needs a Mediator? Is there a power
beyond our Faith with each other? Come, Fidelia, though our parts be hard, yet
we have a fair field to act in, and if friends looking on^ and I miss my part,
prompt me Love, and Fidelia's Heart


I Will drink no more of this poisoned Juice; it is full of madness, Rage, and
Lust; I lost my Reason and my legs too, and but darkly; yet remember what I
did; good Master, calm her Mind, and make my peace, I dare not see her else


'Twas the Prince Leopoldo, sure; he says they called him Prince, the accident
is full of mystery; The gods laugh still at the wisest actions men design
without them


Yes, yes, Leopoldo, and Prince, so they called him; I thought he would have
wronged my Love; if he had, lame as I am, my club should have pash'd his skull


The Prince, men say, is gallant; My Father that hates them all for's Masters
sake, yet calls him the just Leopoldo: And valiant all the world delivers him;
sure he cannot then do a base Action; Yet his sudden passion may want reason
to counsel him; and listening to his blood and power, who knows how that may
prompt him to seek his end upon a Shep-herds Daughter? I Will find Phillora, and
from her know all the Truth; Her wonder and silence makes me fear she loves


She gazed, he says, and stood dumb; then changed color, and with fixed eyes
lost her self in thoughts, till he cut her bow-string undiscerned. Come let us
find her


Sir, my thoughts upon this accident have been working long, but what to wish
or fear, I know not; They have both Honor, and that secures me from the
apprehension of a great misfortune; though my Reason cannot hope the least
happiness from their passion


Let Us lose no time in finding her, nor take notice, when she comes, that we
have heard of this accident; get her things made up, and we will away to
Gaietta; she is too modest to say she loves him; and we must be so discreet as
not to see she is troubled, when she is once in Gaietta, the object being
removed; she will not forget him; it is the first gay sight she has seen, and
that works upon her fancy: But she has youth enough to outgrow greater blows
then this; Yet I confess, my Heart, since my Master dyed, never felt such
divided thoughts as this passage has begot; let us haste and find them


I Will stand the forked lightning sooner then meet her now she is displeased; my
flesh trembles to remember she was angry; either let her forgive me, or I Will be
gone; I Will serve you no more if she frowns; It Is for her sake I am a slave, my
Soul has pleasure in obeying her. -- See where she comes, hide me, earth, from
that anger that fills her Mind; I Will not let you go till she forgives me


They bowed to him and called him Prince; Ye gods, what need has he of such
Additions? But Fortune will be Fortune still, lavish to some, and niggard to
others, disposing her blessings like her blind self; What need had that Person
(his moderation and his parts) of Titles, as if those virtues were not enough
to give him rule over the world


Phillora, come, dispatch; we have staid here till it is late; for you know we
have a long walk to Gaietta


How came you so incensed against your poor Lover? Fie, Phillora, could you be
so displeased with a poor creature who knows no better then to be happy when he
can? One not born subject to the Laws of Honor as we are. Nature was his
Parent and his Mistress, she teaches no other Lessons; and yet, for your sake,
he has bound in strict chains his blood and desires, and a thousand times
hazarded his Life to meet your dangers; And could you be so cruel to intend his
death for one fault? Overcome with wine too? Come, pray let me make his peace.
-- Come hither.


I dare not till she forgives me, and calls me hers again.


Forgive thee? yes, with all my Soul I forgive thee, and beg thy pardon, poor
thing; How full of fear he is of me that had forgot him


I pray dress his arm.


I shall, Dear Pollidor, and then I have other wounds to cure; First, let me
see this, so. -- Go fetch me some of the pot of Balsam thy Father taught us to
make; Here, prithee take this Bow and Quiver; I Will give them thee for being so
ready to execute


Do, and I Will give thee this Scarf, the Prince gave it me.


The Princes Scarf? did he give it thee?


Yes, Divinest. But what care I for him, or it, but to please Gaietta, Master,
I Will put up the Pyes we made; But I Will destroy the bag that holds my enemy,
that baneful Liquor; I Will spend all my Arrows on that damned skin, and let his
blood out as fast as he did mine


And when you have done haste to yonder hill, and diligently observe which way
those Troops bend their march that pass the wood; as soon as you return we will
be gone; come Phillora; you are sad, he is not dangerously hurt


I am glad I mist my aim; And I would there were no more danger in my wounds,
then I wish, or fear, in his


Your wounds, Sister, where are you wounded?


Come nearer, Pollidor, thou art my brother, my dear brother,


But? What dear Phillora? -- Ye gods! it is too true, I fear what the poor Satyr
said, he knew by himself She was in Love, and having felt the sickness
confidently describes the disease; how Nature and Honor strive in her wounded
Breast! but I must not seem to indulge her passion, there being no possibility
she should be happy; Nor can I, if I would be angry with her; My Counsel I Will
give her gently, and use a Brothers Interest to prevail. -- Let not Phillora
wonder at my silence when she weeps; Tears and Sighs, in thy Fortune, cannot
pass by me, but with pain and amazement, what ails my Sister, why does she
hide her Eyes


Oh that I had been blind this day, then I had not seen that god walking
amongst mortal men; his Eyes, Pollidor, wound like the Pestilence; here, here
it struck me, I cannot bear the pain, nor would not willingly be cured. -- It Is
either Love, or death, or both; For both bear darts, and sometimes death has
(they say) used loves Bow; if ever, now he has borrowed it; for I find a
strange sadness here, sadness even to death, Pollidor


Oh poor Phillora, this news flew before thee, but we hoped thy wounds were not
so dangerous, nor their pains so great, as to make thee cry out for help; do
thou know, who it is whose eyes have poisoned all thy peace


The man I know not, But excellent, sure, above the rest; his looks appeared as
if he had some great place in General Fame; Prince they called him too, and
like Mars he moved. -- In his looks you might have read him a King of men


But when Phillora knows this is that Prince Leopoldo she has heard my Father
so often mention, she will then remember what hatred is due to him, and not
heap sorrow upon her Fathers head by loving his Enemy


Leopoldo? was it the Prince Leopoldo? then I am miserable not that he deserves
our hate, for my soul tells me; he has no guilty share in our misfortunes; Did
my Father know him when he reviled him? could Pollidor know and curse Leopoldo?
sure you never saw him, did you


Never I, nor wish not, but to take my Revenge upon him.


That Is not kindly answered, and I dare swear now thou never saw him, else
his looks would have reconciled thee; it is not possible such a Noble
Countenance should have an Enemy in thy breast; it is it self too generous; If
this be the Prince Leopoldo believe the choice my heart has made; it is my first
Election, find him out, make acquaintance with him; if then thou can find in
thy soul to hate him I Will never see him more, But rather die then not comply
with my Brothers wishes. Oh Pollidor, see and know him, and thou will find a
prodigal Star reigned at his birth; prince and power are Crutches fit for
wicked men to lean upon, whse lame souls will fall without such helps; his very
looks Command; Thou will find great things writ in his Eyes, and he must be a
Prince wheresoever he will but deign to Reign


I find your weakness has yielded too far for me to have a power over your
passion: yet if you do love him, you ought not to hate me, nor expose my Honor
rashly; But no more now, it is late, and we must haste to Gaietta


To Gaietta?


Yes, to Gaietta, our safety and our business calls us thither, change of Faces
too, may make you forget him


No, Pollidor, I have no such waxen heart; I confess I am wounded, the Venom of
a Lovers Eye has stung my heart; I know too, it is the common remedy, to decline
the Object; but I scorn to be healed that Common way; let the Scorpion cure the
Scorpions poison; had I never seen the Prince, Not to see him were good
counsel; but having seen him, who can behold any other object? my mind carries
his figure here; I must blind my reason too, e're I can lose the sight of that
bright Star of Honor who now beckens us to come. -- Hark, now he calls, now
fly to him and Honor, they have but one habitation; Follow me, dear Pollidor,
Leopoldo, with no less glory. To stay here, and have our Virtues chained up in
Solitude, shows but a passive virtue, only the Courage of Slaves and Beasts;
and they will exceed us too in such a tame Courage that glories only in what
they can endure. The great trial of great hearts is seen in both Fortunes; who
stoops to either Fate of Prince or Slave is not perfect; come, and see the
Prince laboring himself like the god of War through these dangers; opposing
their Treason with surprising glories; see every look speaks; whose every
motion has more grace and Beauty, and binds me more then his Face; Yet his
words were full of Love; and though I will not say I deserve it, Yet I am
confident I have all that honor could give, in so short a warning; and I will
not doubt but my Love has credit with his Heart, for greater sums then Phillora
desires of Fate, to make her happy. Follow, and be witness of this Truth; see
him only, if you then condemn me, I Will yield


Stay Sister, Phillora, I am past my reason; whither


Have I not been buried all my life here, and beg but one day to live? give me
but this day, and here interr me again


Phillora, I have with grief and amazement heard thee, and now shall cease to
wonder that our counsel cannot prevail, since you have thus thrown off the
modesty of your Sex; For this confident avowing of your Love is so immodest,
that I fear your Phillora will give sooner then he asks; That I love thee
Heaven witness; and that I am not deaf to Love Thy Mother (whose Ghost will
scorn thee,) witness for me; nor does thy youth know that God. It Is true Love,
of it self, is innocent, and the gods have given it for a tie amongst men, and
it is the greatest Blessing, even to the happy'st Fortunes; A Beauty in the best
minds, if not corrupted. Else That, as all good things in Excess, are ill.
Consider then what it is you attempt. A Prince, and your Fathers Enemy; One By
the Stars set out of your reach; If Honor then be your guide, what can you
expect to be (but what I abhor to name?) Are you not born private issue? A
Shepherds Daughter? can that condition hope any thing but to become some vile
thing, despised by him, before enjoyed, and by all, after? Have you a reason to
urge against this? if not, let my truth find place


Scorn me? The Gods we both bow to will revenge me then. A Shepherds daughter?
A Herds-mans Child? the banished Issue of a poor Forester? What if this be so?
yet we bow to the same Altars, Worship the same gods, and draw the same free
Air; does he scorn all his Subjects? if not, why me? I ask him nothing; is it a
fault to love my Prince? If it be, it is no general Crime; Witness the sad
Cause of these Wars; and if my Father did not lend a more Partial ear to his
Anger then to my Love he would not now Command me to hate my Prince, nor longer
cherish that only crime that stains his Story; That low passion makes us
miserable; or can you doubt me so fallen from virtue, so abandoned by all the
gods, as to forsake all their Sacred Rules, to become a prostitute, or such a
Child as to give up all their rights to the first Temptations of my heart? Oh,
Sir, reserve your censure till I have played my Part in this unfinished Story,
and you shall find I build not my happiness on any other grounds but those of
honor; And if the Prince prove Master of all those Excellencies I believe in
him, they shall be no Argument to make me wicked; but if he prove short of
those virtues, you shall find me scorn him, and pity my self; and if his
virtues have no power to tempt me, I am certain his vices shall not; It Is the
Diety in the Prince, not the Man, Phillora stoops to; and when my Father, or
dear Pollidor, can bring such an Argument against my Love, as to show me Prince
Leopoldo acting one thought less then his part, less then a Prince, you shall
see Phillora prompt him, and Act something more then woman


Could I be confirmed he loves, my fears, I confess, would vanish for there is
no such guard to honor; as perfect Love


I am sure I love, and that shall save me; and I hope he loves; for why should
he flatter me? By your own ill rule, if his heart were as wicked, as you would
have me believe him, sure he had power enough, he needed no such darkness, as a
pretended Love to act a mischief in


Poor girl, If all that had said, or swore it, had been Lovers, or the half of
those that have sealed it with their Oaths, tears, or bloods, our Stories,
Phillora, would not have been so full of the mischiefs of that God whose
barbarous fires have thrown ruin and destruction into that peace that inhabits
amongst the gods themselves


Nay, of all the herd, The talking Lover, Sir, should find least Faith; the
angry and the jealous Lover are to be preferred before him; and 'twas a great
truth of him that said, it is with Lovers as with those that work in Tapestry;
they see not the piece until it be done; so he that can describe his pussion,
and tell how much, the why, the where, and the when he loved, and what throws
and pains his heart felt, is awaked from his Dream, he could not else make a
description of a way he never traveled; and he that has trod loves paths once
exactly, may be a good guide to another Passion, but never good Lover himself;
after such a Journey


When I shall love, give me a Maid with a Virgin passion, and ignorance in
Love; that sets out at the Eye, and rests in the heart; Your talking Lover,
that strives to gain Love by the Ear, aims at low pleasures, impatient of
deserving great ones, and loses his Arrows; Where there is Honor, Love needs
no such guide as the tongue, to find out Love; nor company, to tell his story
to; Love and a Lover are to each other all the world; they cannot be alone,
their thoughts are able to people the world


Oh, gentle Pollidor, talk on, chide me thus, and I Will be silent; how came you
to know this great mystery of Love


For thee, Phillora, I have felt a passion, equal to all that Poets feign, and
yet never felt one uneasy thought till this hour


O my Brother! dearer yet than my self; this kindness has tied thee to my soul,
preferred before all but the Prince, second to none but Leopoldo O turn not
away from me, but hear the truth I speak: If what I utter be not Reason, yet
it is Love: a Virgins first and chaste passion for a most excellent object now
in danger, pursued by treason, and bleeding for the faults of others: O let me
do something to help him. I see that smile, now your heart laughs at me; it is
true, I draw a weak Bow, but Love will guide the Arrow: I know I hunt all this
while impossible things, yet for my peace of mind let me beg, Pollidor will be
so kind as to follow me this day; what though I lose my self in some handsome
high Attempts, should thy Sister die, there would be Fame, though no Victory;
and if I live there will be time enough to return hither, and in this private
life lament my ambitious passion, and here learn to level my thoughts at
something low as my fortune


It Is then too late to counsel; Reason I see has lost his force; All I have to
say is, Have you any kindness left, by which I conjure thee, for my sake, defer
this business but this day


No more, for Charity no more; I grant you have reason, but I am mad; Alas, you
sue to me as if I had power over my self; Find the Reason I have lost, and
restore it, and Pollidor shall find me the same governable tame Phillora I was
yesterday. But as it is, you may as soon expect I should sleep when I am
bidden, or leave to remember Pollidor. I know I am mad, and must plead that
Madness, which now must instead of Reason prevail with thee: In desperate
Diseases, and with mortal wounds, where nothing can do good, nothing can do
hurt: I am that person, so sick, so wounded. Thy Sister has at her eyes drank
mortal Poison: Here in my heart I bear the wounds Apollo himself complained he
could not cure; since then in Art and Nature there rests no hope, I conjure
thee in kindness let me again drink the pleasing Venom in, and refuse not to
thy unfortunate Sister (since she cannot live happily) the satisfaction only
of choosing this way to die


Dry thy eyes, and far, far away be that sad hour; Look up Phillora, thou have
overcome me; Reason, Safety, and Revenge, all but Honor, I freely give to thy
Passion, and with a Brothers tender heart I Will serve thee. Ye Gods, what Fruit
this fatal bitter Root will bring I know not; I Am sure it is planted in our
richest ground. Come, lead the way, and since Love thus lays violent hands upon
our hearts, and will force us in this public day to play our parts, let us
obey his Messengers, and thou shall find how dear Phillora is to me, whose
Peace I Will hunt through the world with faith and truth to Fame or Death


And if thou find'st thy Sister made like the common frame of women, in whom a
sickly weak honor inhabits, such as want the counsel of Friends, or the poor
remedy of Spies, to preserve fit for thy love, let my Brother despise me for
ever


I am confirmed, and thus will seek our fortunes in this day with minds
prepared for all kind of chances. And you Monarchs of the World, Fame and
Honor, what though we bring no Troops of armed men to court you, yet look down
with justice upon our actions, and ye shall find we have not lost one grain of
that virtue the Gods were pleased to give us


My soul takes fire at thy words; and though Pollidor be no Prince, but a kind
of Plant bred and nourished in the Woods, yet I have seen him act what the best
of Princes need not blush to imitate; and I prophecy, though he now begins to
build without materials, Fortune will supply him; and Princes looking on shall
wonder why Pollidor was a Shepherd, and their People wish him a Prince seeing
him act such things as we sacrifice to in others; then shall the story of kind
Pollidor out-last his Marble, and die only with the world


It Is in vain to resist this Passion; yet if the Prince's love prove noble,
greater and weightier interest than they imagine may yet hang upon this day;
but the time is so distracted, and so short, I cannot listen to the call of
those things that concern us most; for they are gone, and I must follow; Love
and Innocence protect them


RAvack's stay makes me apprehend some danger, the Armies are both in the
Woods, and my fears are more for him and those dear Pledges of Fortune; should
they miscarry, all our faith would find but a sad conclusion; Clytus too
confirms my jealousies of the Spanish Prince, that he means some foul play, by
his desiring to marry with the Princess Bellamira; his first confidence to
promise the People to produce their long lost and supposed dead Prince begot my
fears; but 'twas no time then to discover the falsehood of that Promise, because
it did our business; for it armed the People,, and shall finish our work too;
for before they can be undeceived, or question the truth of that Promise, we'll
have played our Game; for if we overcome Leopoldo their anger's nothing; if
Leopoldo overcome us, that nor all the world shall win me to survive that day.
Cleon, we must keep a strong Guard this night; and leave order, if Ravack
comes, though it be late, that he be let into the Ports, let the Galleys ly
loose; and feed your men well, that we may be ready upon all occasions that are
presented; I fear the Spaniard, but we must not seem to mistrrst him; yet let
all the Officers know Clytus is the person they are to follow, if he and the
Prince of Spain dispute; give this intelligence your self, it is not safe to
trust it to a common Messenger, lest our fears wrong the Prince


I shall obey, our Forces are this Evening joined with Clytus, it is a brave
Body; and trust me, the King's looks with a mind not less daring; it is true,
their number is not so great as ours, yet their virtues may be equal; for the
Gentry fills his Troops, and such whose Fortunes depend upon the Court; in that
lies their odds; and 'twas in my opinion no policy to to take away their
Retreat to Capua, 'twill but beget a desperate Charge; for now their flight can
promise no safety; many will do more in such a necessity than Honor would have
prompted them to


It Is too late to give that Counsel now, but let us be ready to do our parts
when Fortune calls; our Rests are up too, and to Justice I yield my part who
knows my heart is honest


CLytus welcome; Are your Troops joined with those of Gaietta?


Yes, Sir, and we have already received a Visit from the Enemy, we have taken
some Prisoners that assure us that the King, Prince, and Princess, are all in
the Army


Why then we shall do all our work at once; I hate delays, let Fortune give me
my Answer quickly, whether a Monarch or a Slave; -- If my Stars have in this
Fate this Crown, This day it is


If you could produce the person of our King, my prophetic soul tells me the
day were ours; such a signal Victory would make all their hearts turn Coward;
the justice and vengeance they must expect from his injuries would wound
farther and deeper than either Sword or Spear


Make it safe by Conquest for him, and my life to gage I Will bring him to you;
but if his Friends will not give one blow for his safety, I fear he will not be
persuaded to trust their jealousy; but this is wide of our business --
Roderigo


It Is so, do, whisper, the Gods hear you, still I have acquainted Nigro with my
fears, and he, I Am certain, will not be circumvented; it is for our own interest
we fight as well as yours, ere we see the King, else you should stand alone for
Clytus


This though it be policy, Sir, is neither honest nor gallant; besides, I
cannot be such a Fool as to believe Clytus durst say these things, but that he
is sure of his Army, who you see has possessed yon Hill, and stand in a manner
divided from us: Take heed how you anger him lest you tempt him to be wise and
honest; it is easily done; but standing still, or joining with the King, or if
he will look on, he is secure in the advantage of the place, and may laugh at us
that must labor for him; and when we have destroyed each other, how easy
'twill be for him to give Laws to both we shall quickly find. It Is my counsel
to dissemble still; it is true, one blow with this Dagger does it; but what good
can you derive from that mischief? when the Battel's over; if you can strike
him securely it may signify something, but till then let us bear him fairly:
it is late, and the King's men are advanced already, and we must not let them
take such courage as 'twill give them to find us unwilling to fight


Come, Clytus, every one to his charge.


I fear no Enemies; if my Friends be true, I Will look to my Enemy my self; and
I Will have a care of false Friends too; Roderigo, I shall, and yet I Will fight
well to day


See, Sir, my fears are true, upon my life he is jealous; something and quickly
must be thought upon, and wisely too, either to confirm him, or remove him
hence; but Fortune, if that Trumpet sounds what I believe, it will perhaps take
the work into her own hands, and we may see the Traitor fall in his own snare
-- Hark, Sir, it is a Charge


Away then, Give the Word round, Command all to march.


FArewell Palantus: this day is set to decide our hopes or fears; Love be thou
propitious, and I shall not fear the rest; the King has his ancient virtue
still, his courage, and will command the Battle himself; my Charge lies this
way, let us embrace and part, and this day strike, to be always free from such
a danger as this false pretense which now has armed these Traitors


Pray Sir, let Arcus attend the Princess in her journey to Capua, Philemon is
old; and though his courage be great it is but ill guarded; if I might attend
that service he should not have that envied Office


Nor would thou grant it me, if thou knew'st my mind, -- I shall not fail to
wait upon her Highness; but I believe till Clytus be forced from yonder Hill,
it will not be safe for us to pass, for we are still subject to his parties;
and we must expect he will not let us pass free unspoke with; and if once we be
taken it is a great blow to your Highness affairs, as appears by the Spaniards
Propositions of Marriage; for though he promise to give a King, his business is
to get a Queen, and by that Interest of Blood ally his success unto the Crown;
which Curse Heaven with thy Fires forbid, or give Arcus leave with his Dagger
to remove


Hark, they receive the Charge; Away, our Place and Interest is first this day,
and Honor tells us it ought to be so in danger too


URge them: how Roderigo? the aged King acts wonders above man; how the
stubborn rock broke our charge; he has many wounds, and in revenge of them his
men fight, such resolution I never saw among so few men


How I abhor that traitor Clytus, that could so barbarously charge his King!


He is a villain, but his hand's useful in this work; haste to him and second
him in his charge; I Will once more prove the Princes temper; he has a name in
Arms, and I long to grapple with him


NO, no more, Palantus, it is enough, Fate has run his circle; here my greatness
begun, and here it ends; in a Battle, I set out King, and in a Battle end; the
sword gave me my honor, and to the sword I have again surrendered it: and I
prithee tell my Son, if he survive the day, and fortune smile, which yet I
despair not, (for his virtue must meet greater dangers then these) command him
to search out the truth of the Spaniards declarations; and if he can find my
Nephew, let him restore the Crown; it had been my voluntary act, had not that
traitor Clytus crushed all our intentions; the rest were beaten, I saw them
stagger; their Officers and Prince retreated, till Clytus false and stout with
wicked troops of our own Countrymen charged us, fools and wicked that could not
in such an act believe how great a sin their valor was


Oh, Sir, do not take such hasty leave from your poor and miserable friends;
what shall we do when you are gone


Thy faith, Palantus, will redeem to story the long lost gratitude of
Favorites; and it is one joy to me I never was deceived where I trusted; I find
a blindness that foretells the way I am to go: farewell, be happy for thy
kindness to thy old Master, who without trouble dies, embraced by the arms of
him whom he loved; thy faith was always welcome, but in death most precious;
and I prithee fail not to give my blessing to my dear Bellamira, whose dream is
made good in this my fall; and to let thee see all thy care did not hide from
my eyes thy modest passion for Bellamira, here from my dying hands take this
Legacy; I have worn it as a relick many a day, love it as well as I did, and
death can only part ye; could I have loved her less, or consented to see her
acting of a deed I could not justify, long since thou had had my consent to
have been happy; but she was ever my dear Bellamira; and I know Palantus though
he loved, yet his mind had honor too, and would not see her go less to
satisfy his passion. But it grows late, and I find my blood waste apace. --
Hark, we are pursued; save thy self, leave me, faithful Palantus


Oh, Sir! do not bid me believe you love me, and command me this, at least not
wish I should obey you: this treasure of


Who are you? disarm, and bind him.


We must ask that of you; the day has given you power to appoint us fates.


What is he you defended?


One that an hour since would have fought with thee, or any man alive; 'twas my
Father; may thine again never bless his


Thy faith shall plead for thee, though thy curses has struck me more then any
danger I ere saw. Roderigo, behold a great example of faith and fortune; how
pious that young man looks in his wounds, and how lovely in his sorrow


And how black we look that caused them! my soul abhors my part of this
conquest, I never pitied an enemy before: indeed we never met a gallant one
till now; and had not their own swords fought against them, we had not stood
here now to mourn their sufferings; how I hate that traitor Clytus! he called
me in the Battle, and bad me witness what he did for his young King. Villain,
some old curse will find thee for it


Well, what is next to be done? the Prince stands still, and Palantus's Troops
are rallied


'Twas a gallant fellow their Chief; I saw him charge to second the King, when
Clytus broke him, but since he was not seen


Sir, the Officers expect you; Clytus is pressed by the Prince, and calls for
horse to second him


Away with him to my Quarter, let him receive no injury.


Come, friend, shall we be jogging? you have a kind enemy you see.


His humanity has won me strangely; if I live to see the Princess she shall
know how handsomely he gave his character, both of the King and Prince. His
general too is a brave fellow; with what scorn and hatred he mentioned that
traitor Clytus, the cause of all these miseries; that villain laid this Scene
of war and death


Come dispatch, dispatch.


Witness heaven, how unwillingly I part from this dear load; and friend, if
thou will return and give this old man a grave, and but tell me where you lay
his body, poor as I am in fortune, I shall find something to reward such piety


When you are safe we'll talk of that.


Let Us go through the wood upon the left hand, and there we shall have time to
examine his Pockets


This way, this way, Pollidor, I see the storm bonds; all their wicked force is
bent to destroy the best of men.


Hold, Phillora.


Will you yet retreat, and not with idle passion fondly pursue a lost man? you
see the day is lost, you see the gods the juster side have taken, the enemy has
all in chase; and if we stay we must expect the same fate that follows their
impiety; it is ridiculous, this love, that thus with madness you pursue; can you
imagine it possible that these swords can redeem the day? you see in kindness
to your grief we have given up our Reason, and our revenge; and, for your sake,
struck even against our hearts, and all that kindness begets but a wilfulness
in you


I find my Brother has but dissembled then, and Pollidor has no sense of the
pain he never felt, nor kindness for Phillora; he could not else thus harshly
rub her wounded mind: but take heed this despised power thou now contemnest,
does not in vengeance arm some unequal dart against thee; this mornings Sun
found my breast as free as thine, proud too as my Brother, both of my form and
liberty, and at as high a rate I prize my freedom; yet one sight of his eyes
has burnt them all to ashes; and I prophecy those several virtues that now lie
idle in your breast, shall but make love a triumph when those torches of thy
eyes shall take fire from that star, to whose beauty fate and love have decreed
thy pain


Alas, Phillora, here is none that chides thy passion; counsel we may; we only
tell thee, Love and Honor were born twins, and will endure neither separation
nor competitors; you must not divide those friends, together they act great and
glorious things; the mind that possesses them is scarce mortal, but if you
separate that cordial, you will find too late, Love is but the poison; excellent
in medicine when prepared and allayed with honor, and but prepares the way;
it is good, Phillora, at opening the door to let the Treacle in; so much of the
venom Love is good as serves to fire the mind with great thoughts; but honor
(child) must direct his feet; he will neither find else, nor know his home


Oh, be not thus cruel, Sir, to wound me with your reason; my sick eyes cannot
see the light; have mercy upon me, and let me go


You must not go; it is kindness to be cruel: your passion grows to madness; and
it is folly, not friendship, to listen to your prayers; you must not pass


I shall force my way either through thine, or my own heart.


Come, pass here; make thy way through my heart, or and it made by grief,
ungrateful and unkind Phillora, to see all my love and care thrown behind thee,
like the despised things of the world; go, Phillora, follow thy passion, give
to a stranger, offer to the pride of one that perhaps will not accept thy
present, that love, for nothing which thou would not pay unto a Brother: but
when thou returnest here thou shall find me dead; for know I will not outlive
thy honor: go wretched Maid, give that innocence which thou shall never find
again; that innocence for which, this day, thou stood'st the envy of thy time,
and wilt hereafter fall below a common pity, cruel, blind, ungrateful and
unkind Phillora


Oh Pollidor, Pollidor, thou have struck me to the soul; ungrateful, and
unkind! any thing but that, that was cruelly urged, witness my broken heart, to
which thy unkind kindness has given its mortal wounds: farewell, Pollidor; be
thou happy though I might not. --


She is not well, she looks pale; Phillora, dear Phillora, look up; see thy
Brother in tears, beg thy pardon; it is the heavens fights in this passion, and
their wills must not be disputed; speak kindly to her and heal her mind


Alas, Sir, how easy it is for me to speak kindly, heaven knows that sees my
heart; Phillora, Sister, unlucky Maid, once more pardon the harsh expressions
of a Brothers grief, whose love and kindness mistook the way to express it
self; all my design was to have recommended reason as a companion for thy love,
for love alone is but a passion, and a blind one; Dear Phillora, much care and
pains goes to make him a virtue, and then honor must be his parent, and his
issue too; this is all I had to say, and this I would fain should have been
reason; but thy love shall prevail hereafter; and dear Phillora cease now to be
sad, and angry with thy Brother, or to believe me so barbarous as to dispute
against that god of passion, but as I fear him thy enemy: -- Or think me such a
stranger to thy heart as to doubt Phillora's honor; what I have said was only
to prompt thy mind, which I found this day so busy obeying of thy love, I was
afraid, during this civil war in thy mind, some watchful enemy passion might
surprise that strength which I am confident no assault, or siege can win


Ever loved, but never dearer to my heart then now! Oh, let me rest upon thy
breast, and hide my blushes there! yet my soul covets no faulty thing; it is no
whisphers, nr midnights darkness that I seek; no corner to tell my story in; no
guilt hangs upon my heart, my mind and desires are as bright as the days guide,
as public as Leopoldo's name, I dare avow my love of him; shall we because the
gods frown add misery to those which they afflict, who, we know, suffer for
others crimes? and join with treason to wound the man my soul admires? no
Brother, he is my Prince; and let heaven speak to him in thunder, while I obey
and follow him to his Grave, or throne; whiles my heart weeps over the one, but
never envy him the least glory of the other


There are armed men entered the Wood; haste, dear Mistress, and follow me, or
we are lost. The Princes party flies in every place; the enemy pursues us close


The gods protect the Prince.


Here I left her, there is the Satyr; where is my Daughter?


Now gone into the Woods.


What makes you stay behind, what is it you gaze on?


A man lies a dying here in the bush, he groans and stirs still.


A man, where?


Come, leave him, prithee Master, he is but ill company now, and going a worse
journey; and if we stay, perhaps, we may be sent upon the same errand


Is there any life? help, hold up his head, he breathes and stirs; it is long
since I saw this face, yet there are lines in it my memory


Carry him to the Cave; and if he be a friend let me alone to cure him.


I Do not like these villains whispering, they have made me leave the road;
sure they design some mischief in this wood; should I seem to fear, that might
encourage them in their villainy. -- How now, What whisp'ring's this


What we have done already is more than we can answer; let us search his
pockets, and deliver him to the guard at the foot of the Hill.


Villains, this violence shall cost you dear.


Ha! This is no small bird, such feathers few of your kind wear.


Search farther; Here Is a Jewel too, and papers, those we shall not use.


If they find my picture too I Am lost, my Soul cannot endure that separation;
What would you have more, have you not taken all already? -- Hell take your
loathed Souls


Oh, this is it; A picture, what have we here? Golden Houses for shadows?


It Is so, a picture only, after all the rest of your Injuries, restore but
that and I Will freely forgive you; take the case too, only the picture again;
if you have any humanity you will not deny it; it is to you of no use, but to me
the dearest jewel of my life; It Is of a friend, whose Memory I adore; set any
rate upon it and I Will purchase it; it is your own Interest I propose


Keep our counsel and you shall have it, upon our words we'll restore it; But
if you tell any Tales, or complain to the General of this visitation of your
pockets, then down goes Dagon, nothing saves your Saint; here she shall lie
safe till we find you a man of your word; till then, take a civil leave of her,
and let us be gone


Without you will restore it I Will not stir one step.


Come, come; if you consent to go in all together, we'll afford you the cutting
into quarters, and do it at four


Villains, you will dearly repent this Insolence. -- Pray, (and heartily) I get
not my hands loose; 'twill be sad to some of you ever if I be free


Come, fret and curse at home, till we repent.


OH Arcus, 'twas she, there is nothing like her; She is an original, I saw her
and the poor Satyr too; laboring in our cause, she acts above a mortal power;
My Hearts a fire till I know her Fortune; she had the scarf on I gave the
Satyr; My Father and Palantus are both wounded, and both missing; Haste and
try, if possible, in this general mischief, to save some remnant of our family:
Find my Sister, conjure her to haste to Capua, and there ship for Rome; whither
(if I can reach my ends) I Will with diligence repair


Alas, Sir, I fear she is lost, and so will you be too if you thus pursue your
passion; Consider, Sir, how many thousand lives and fortunes hang upon your
precious days


Lost! Heaven sleeps not sure, nor will so negligently part with such a Jewel;
And Nature, kind Nature, that has care even of Plants, and waits so diligently
upon every Season, think thou, Arcus, she would mind a Bird or Tree and
neglect these? No, no, she would sooner spare the Sun, the Pride of her
workmanship, then suffer such a blow; 'twould wound her deeper then her
opposites of Sword, Plague, and Famine, though waited on by death; Hark, we are
pursued; some brave Enemy that would bring a gallant Revenge, or a handsome
death, would make me smile upon my Fortune; But I talk, and thou art here
still, my Sister will be lost; Fly, Arcus, fly, ere it be too late to counsel
her


Alas, Sir, what sullen Starr rules you? Why would you have me leave you? Why
do you choose to fall alone? Do you think I am of so low a spirit, or so base
as to leave my Prince in danger, and seek my own safety? Go, and I Will follow
you throughout all the world; but if I leave you, Heaven curse me


We are all lost then; for I am resolved to find this Maid ere I think of
safety; I saw her enter this wood. Oh, Arcus, it is a strange wonder of her Sex;
It Is a gallant Mind dwells in that private Breast, and blessed is he shall find a
Friendship there, yet my Love shall cut-vie his; For he that is her equal, is
mercenary, and proposes to himself her for his reward, which I cannot without
injuring her or Leopoldo; which ere I will do, thou shall see me fly where my
despaires will carry me, and converse with Beasts or Trees, envying the life of
Plants, whilst I despise my own


Oh Sir, let me beg once in my days to be believed; and lest my fears prove
fatal, by her whose fair eyes you love best I beg you will at lest quit this
habit and your order, and for a time strike sail to fortune in this storm;
you will sink a brave vessel else, and lose a noble fraught


How? And fall a private man? Pluck from my self my Honor? No, Arcus, thou
shall see me frown, and meet the worst of Fortunes; For I dare die, as well as
live a Prince; And here, with all the Triurnio, and glorious distinctions of a
Prince, thou shall see me fall a crowned sacrifice to Love and Fortune


Sir, Wisdom as well as Courage is allowed us in all our accidents of this
life; and to be wilful in our miseries upbraids the gods, and looks as if we
would glorify our selves: Besides, if you desire to be capable of enjoying her
own wishes in this habit, and like your self, it is impossible. Leopoldo, This
day was your happiness; But Leopoldo now can promise nothing but misfortunes;
your misery is the desire of all men. The busy Ambition of the Enemy hunts
nothing but the greatness of the Prince; In which time a private man may
escape; Besides, the the Maid will sooner listen to your words when you stand
in a level with her, then when she sees such a desperate height as is betwixt
her and her Princes Love


Ha! What have thou said? It Is Truth he urges, and I submit to thy Reason in
hopes to find it succesfull; -- Thus I consent to a disguise, which this
public Character cannot wear. -- Arcus, take this envied Character from my
afflicted Breast; This shows how dangerous these distinctions of Honor are,
and how vain men are that seek them. -- Poor and safe; could greatness believe
that truth! how happy might we be whose sad experience I now must prove? Would
I could lose my self to all the world, but thee Bellamira, and this Maid


Come, Sir; who knows but this stooping a little to Fortune may make her kind,
and take it for satisfaction for all the scorns your Virtue has thrown upon
her; trusting still to Justice, and aspiring to that title rather then the
fortunate Leopoldo: Hark, Sir, the noise draws this way; in this woods
thickness we may hide our selves, and let the danger pass


Lead the way, but with how ill a will I yield to Fortune, the gods witness;
Love, it is thy power more then any argument of fear or hope prevails with me


It Is sure a party of the Enemy that pursues us, but these woods are thick, and
we are now near home


'Twas the Prince, I know his clothes; His royal slave was with him too, a mark
not to be mistaken


If the Satyr overtook him he is then retired to our Cave, to enjoy the welcome
news of the Kings safety, which if his age denies not, I can promise


How fain I would believe the Prince safe too in this time of penurious hope!
that he lived, were all I would ask: Alas, I saw him fall amongst his enemies;
and since that sad hour can give my heart no news of his safety; I would fain
speak with him, and tell him only how innocent and faithful a passion my heart
labors with. Could he then be so barbarous as to scorn me


No, no, gentle Maid; Heaven (if thy rage have a curse yet left in store) throw
it upon me if I scorn thee


It Is the Prince; and thus upon my knees I fall to him, in virtue, courage and
all that is excellent, a Prince; all but these miseries are his own: Oh Sir,
that you are safe is all my joy; and let not the Prince be angry to find a fond
Girl hunt his greatness, who begins to fear her self his evil Angel; you were
never happy since I saw you


Fair and dear; what interest in this days chance engaged your virgin hand? why
do thou not fly before our misfortunes crush thee


Oh Sir; gods and men will fight your cause, and all that have heard of
Leopoldo (but this band of wicked ones) would dye for you; and if my life could
save a hair of that generous head, I Would dye as quietly as little birds in their
Nests; for I shall never find a joy but in serving you; and it is one great
blessing we have saved the King


The King!


By the appointment of the gods, I hope, he fell into my hands, faint and full
of wounds, known by this signet upon his finger; for it is long since my age
left wandering in the splendid paths of Courts; he is now in our Cave, where he
is safe and private; and I hope a blessing in his cure; and if your Highness
will vouchsafe to put your royal head under that humble roof till this storm be
over, we shall think our selves blessed in the occasion


No more, no more; my life and all that ever was precious I value less then
this news; in spite of mischief I grow happy, since I have found a faith here;
for I heard your discourse even now, the joy it gave me may your soul never
wish in vain; may I not know your name


Phillora, Sir, I am called; Daughter to this good old man; here in these woods
I had my birth and abode; I have a Brother too, dear as mine eyes; he is now
bleeding in your Highness cause, ambitious to be in wounds, allied to your
miseries; heaven bless him when he fights your Battles, and curse them that
fight against you


It Is the prettiest and the gallantest innocence that ever my eyes saw; ye
gods, such another excellency but my bright Mistress sure the earth shows not;
how my heart pities the disparity of her birth, that forbids them to equal the
gods in happiness


Gentle Phillora, is there no hope to find your love has charity for my
passion, as well as value for some other object


Find the means, Sir, to satisfy that question; let the Prince and honor
search it, and if I deny, at the rate of my life, to purchase it, let no mercy
find me


Oh Phillora, name not those tyrants, honor and opinion, that still persecutes
mankind, and impose their severe laws upon our hearts; what have Lovers to do
with them, or they with us? we will love beyond their Rules, and suffer beyond
their examples, till there be nothing left for us to imitate; and then we will
our selves become examples; and to love like us shall be the next ages rule;
and Phillora, all ages wonder. -- Yet, methinks, in midst of my despairs honor
holds out a light, which though it be afar off, it guides me to something that
I may hope


Hope, Sir! why not? all that is honorable; and your virtue will overcome the
rest of fate; there is nothing lays such violent hands upon generous minds as to
see a Lover despair of being happy: and this doubtful looking upon your wishes,
whatever they be, shall make me give sooner then the greatest Argument your
vanity can propose; there is a kind of Magic in the eye of a languishing
despair, that good nature cannot see without pity, and yields sooner to it then
presumptuous confidence, or force


Yet force has been successful, and many have outlived it.


None, where there was honor.


Will you then deny the fame of those maids that lust and force have injured?


If they outlive it unmindful of a just revenge, I shall.


Would you be so cruel to kill the man should thus speak his passion, when this
Idol, honor, you adore, has stopped all other possible ways to his desire


Ha! 'twas not well urged.


If this be serious, I have yet a power to save her honor.


Do you doubt it, Sir? would I live famed here, or dye to


Why, it is not for fear of the gods then that you are honest? for, sure,
murder is worse then rape, and in this you declare there is something you
prefer to them. Suppose I should now by the advantage I could find abuse this
opportunity, would you kill me


The gods forbid; no, Sir, when I find the Prince start back from virtue, and
so far quit his own Rules of goodness, that have gained him the surname of
Just, and for my sake become a Ravisher, I shall quickly let him see how I hate
such a tempter; for when I find my innocence too weak to defend my honor I
shall at least find honor enough to defend my innocence; and I will always dye
worthy your love, Sir, when you shall refuse to let me live so; nor is death
faulty then, but like a friend to virtue, finding oppressed arms in her defense;
and strikes, not to destroy Phillora, but to rescue her honor


Upon my soul thou would, thou excellent and single in thy goodness; come
near old man, and record my vows, that if thy Daughter be but gently born, here
I Will fix my heart; either hers or never woman's, so heaven and earth assist me


Oh hold, Sir, call back that vow; be still my Prince, while I follow and
admire you as far as fame finds faith, or passage; but to be yours will make me
blush for ever, and the guilt will always deject me


By my love, by beauty, innocence, and all that is fair, by truth it self, or
Phillora (which is all these) I swear, thy honor and my vow I Will most
religiously preserve; and if my life be blessed by thy embraces, thou shall
command more in that day then I would beg now; do not doubt my faith nor your
power, which nothing but your fears can lessen


The gods say, Amen.


Rather all the gods forbid such Hymen's should attend your blessed day; let me
first sink forgotten into my little grave, ere I become the subject of such a
curse


Is this Phillora's friendship?


Do I refuse this for want of love? no, Sir, when that comes in question my
life is ready to clear the doubt; I know I have nor birth, nor parts to pretend
a fellowship to Crowns; the sin and guilt of such an act would sink me lower
then your passion has done you; let me be still your subject with my innocence;
let your Reason love me as well as your passion, lest I lose your love and your
value both; for in unequal Hymen's beauty will find but a short reign. For
Princes grow ashamed of their faults; and the gods protect me from such misery
as your deposed love


Will Phillora thus cruelly punish my love? thus, for fear of a possible ill,
to make me certainly miserable


Alas, Sir; my love in all its kindness speaks to you; and when you forget your
self you ought to be punished for that act more then for your crimes to others.
I am sure I shall be severer far when you offend so then when you injure me;
for witness heaven, Leopoldo is still most precious in my eyes. Oh, Sir; rather
haste to repair the ruins of this day; you were never overcome, till now, and
sink faster amongst your friends then in the Battle; and I that would dye to
serve you, in this command you would make me the destroyer of my Prince


It Is resolved, I will be thine, or else a single life fate shall not deny me.


Ye gods, what do I hear and see? my glad heart is big with joy.


I hear a noise of weapons.


Alas, Sir, we have talked away our safety; I fear new dangers, or separation,
worse then death


Yet if we can regain the wood, I Will guide you to my Cave.


Oh Phillora, it is in vain, they are upon us.


Yield thee, wretch, or this bold attempt shall cost


It Is he, and we are alone; heaven, thou art kind.


The villain has wounded me again; such a courage in a wretch, and of a beaten
party, I never found


There, take your length on that earth your ambition thought to enslave; see
how one handful of it has checked that in all thy glory; my heart has not
malice nor baseness enough to strike thee upon thee ground, nor leisure to
consider thy fate, until I have found my dear Phillora; sure these woods have
paid his debt


These woods are so thick, and the Rogues fly like deer in them; it is in vain
to pursue 'em, where left you the Prince


I saw him not, Sir.


Nor I.


Nor you? ye dogs, where did you leave him?


We saw him not, Sir, since we left the party.


Roderigo, here, thy hand, prithee.


Ha! wounded, and upon the ground!


My hurts are slight, by chance of war only; and it was a gallant fellow, who
ere he be, that gave them


Beat all the woods and plains, he cannot escape; what was he?


Seek him, but upon your lives wrong him not; it is but a private person; but I
dare say, a bolder soul tried not his fate this day


This is he, Sir; we knew him by your Highness sword.


It Is so, use him kindly, and carry him to my quarters. If thy Prince had
fought thus well this day he had not been missing now in Battle


My Prince fought better then the proudest of you; my Prince stood the last
danger of the field, and scorns to fly; he is either dead, or worse, in chains;
nor can you boast your victory, which you ow to our own swords; 'twas Clytus,
not Almanzor, beat Leopoldo


Away with him to the Quarters.


We'll through the woods again, and try what ballast he bears in his breeches.


Make haste, and meet us at the hill by the wood side.



