SELINDRA. A Tragy-Comedy.

Written by Sr WILLIAM KILLIGREW.

OXFORD, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Ric: Davis, 1666.

THis Rumor through the Town of Prince Philocles being Crowned King of Hungary
is beyond cregit


Who is Author of this discourse?


It has no Author, a Packet to the Emperor is brought by the common Post, who
only said, the last Post told him so


And that last post, might hear it from another; -- What does the Emperor
declare


We shall know now, his Letters are in his hand.


Have you yet Learnt Cecropius, from whence this Rumor comes concerning
Hungary


I can by no means find the Author Sir; yet the whole Town is full of it, it is
in all men's mouths that Prince Philocles is Crowned King of Hungary, yet none
know why they say it


It cannot be, these Letters are but three days old, in which Antillacus only
mentions Philocles returned to Belgrade, having chased the Germans home: --


Daughter, I sent for you to partake the News these Letters bring; they speak
Philocles his Victories over the bold Germans, by which we gather, he will be
shortly here; -- We will welcome his return Ordella, with a solemn Triumph,
to raise his great thoughts to higher Actions; -- To this end I sent for you,
to think of some new way to entertain the Princess Astella, who no doubt your
Brother will bring with him


Sir, I am so pleased to hear my Brother's well; I cannot yet enjoy his
Conquest


Cecropius, be it your care to see these Triumphs ordered for Philocles, as
they were for me, when I returned Victorious out of Asia; And Cleonel thy
charge is to Summon all our Young Nobility, unto a Royal Turnament, and be thy
self the Glory of our Court


You make me blush Sir.


It shall be as you direct Sir; but how soon does the Prince write his motion
will be this way


My Letters are from our General Antillachus in have; who by the next, does
promise a full relation


Have you no Letters from my Brother Sir?


Not yet Ordella; which I much wonder at?
-- What news Armanthus?

Sir, the Prince sent me before, to give you notice of his approach.


His approach! how near?


He is about a League behind Sir.


Is this habit, and thy sad looks, the signs of Victory? are Philocles and
you alone returned? Is all lost Armanthus


Your Army is safe Sir, the Germans have quitted Hungary as you have heard,
and that Crown also has been offered unto Philocles


And by him received I hear; why then is this sad show? why such sorrows in
thy face? while we were ordering Triumps to receive Philocles, thou have
surpised us with such sadness, as becomes ruined States only


It Is for no less a loss I mourn Sir, for by your Victories, so sad a fate is
befallen Hungary, that all Noble Hearts will feel some sorrow for it, though
they merrited no less


Make me know it.


When we had freed Hungary from the Germane War, and while the brave Prince
Pollinesso, with Philocles was Conquering, and returning from the Germane
Confines back to Belgrade, the old King Trebellio, and his Eldest Son Barzanes,
repented the Conditions made with your Majesty, for the re-delivery of
Moldavia; they forgot the benefit received by our Grecian Swords, and prepare
to send home Philocles, laden with Scorns, instead of Trophies


Strange insolence! and as high a perjury as ever provoked Heaven! what
followed! how did Pollinesso bear himself


The Young Prince Pollinesso was a firm Friend to Philocles, and endeavored
what he could, to divert his Fathers, and his Brothers wicked purposes


I Will make the whole Nation shrink under my just Anger.


It will not need Sir, for as they securely sought to seize on Prince
Philocles (who lodged in the same Castle with them) it so pleased the gods,
that he by a quick securing of himself, the same night the Plot was laid, did
accidentally occasion all their ruins, though he intended no harm unto their
persons


Their ruins! are they dead? all dead!


They are Sir, and their crimes, not worthy of that sorrow the Prince has for
them, had not the innocent Pollinesso fallen with them


By what accident fell he?


Pollinesso to do Philocles Service, was that fatal night concealed, where he
in a by-Room, might discover his Fathers wicked Counsels, unto which he was
never called, by reason of his avowed love to Philocles; So that when we from
the Princes Lodgings surpised the Castle Gate, the Alarm roused the
Hungarians from their close Couucil, and discovered Pollinesso where he stood
hid, who being in that amaze, compelled by his Father and Barzanes, to fly with
them unto a little Postern Gate, (to us unknown) that led unto the River, where
all entering a small Fisher Boat, they hasted down the stream to their own
Camp, which they found newly destroyed by our Army: (a mischief they designed
that night on us;) frighted by this ruin, they all return into their Boat, and
by a sudden wind that arose, were all drowned in the rough Danube


Why had not Pollinesso notice of your purpose?


We had no time, nor could we come where he stood Concealed, if Philocles had
delayed, he had been lost; and then, our design being only to seize on
Trebellio, and Barzanes persons; we could apprehend no danger toward
Pollinesso


Where is Astella? how did she escape? how does she bear her Father and her
brothers loss? how does she look on Philocles? and how become the Crown, and
Throne, now they are her own


After this sad accident, Philocles was informed that Astella was conveyed
away before the War, on purpose to abuse him; but where concealed, none knew
but those who were with Trabellio drowned


But how has Philocles despos'd the Affairs of Hungary?


The Hungarians much amazed at Astellas absence; did urge Philocles to accept
the Crown, as by the hand of Heaven thrown on him, but he without delay,
delivered up the sole power and trust unto Orfanes, and five more, until
Astella might be found; and then by the consent of all, he did command
Antillacus in his return with the Army, to take possession of Moldavia, which
by a double right is now again rejoined unto your Empire Sir


My Son has been two quick, in ordering so great affairs!


Philocles, the gods are just, they have blessed thy undertakings, which thou
should not grieve, but thank them for, they have saved me a labor too, in
punishing those ungrateful perjured Princes


Had not Pollinesso fallen, I had not cast away a sigh for all the rest, for
him, my whole Life spent in sorrow, is not enough, he was as Noble, as the
others were unworthy; he and I, contracted such a Friendship, you would have
thought but one heart had given life to both


Thou have done ill Philocles, so rashly to dispose so great Affairs without
my Council; I hear you have given away a Kingdom, in a Complement


Sir, what I have done, will not abate my interest there; I have also made a
promise to search for Astella, in our Neighbor Islands, where it is most like
she is concealed


That will be near as great a folly as the other: to what purpose will you run
such a bazzard? rather meet our Army, and return with it to Belgrade, there let
Astella find you securing her interest, in her absence


I cannot with my Honor do it Sir, Astella may then believe, I sought the
Ruin of her Family, to gain the Crown on my self


What if she do? you may at leisure inform her of the Truth; -- I do Command
you, to lay by your further thought of this fond Journey, to search for
Astella; is this a time to act Romances in? when the whole whole World is in
Combustion round us; think better on it Philocles


I hope my Brother will not throw himself on dangers, without a good Argument
to justify his Actions; this new Journey, gives me new fears for you


I shall consider ere I go Ordella, and at your Lodgings this night, express
my joy to see you


Oh! Oh!


Selindra weeping! -- has the sad tale of Hungary, drawn these tears from your
fair Eyes Madam


Good my Lord, spare me a while, I am not sit for Courtship now.


I cannot with Honor leave you in the power of such an Enemy, as your sorrow
is


You cannot deliver me from a greater then your self this time.


That is not kindly said Selindra, scarce Civil, if you consider my long Love,
and my Respects


My Lord, you know I ever shunned your Love, and as much as in me lay, avoided
those respects, you now upbraid me with


I do confess you have, it is therefore I now come, to press you to declare, if
I may ever hope to gain more favor from you; my suit is present Marriage, may
I hope for such happiness at last, if not now


As I never have, so I shall never give you cause to think it.


So Fair, so Innocent, so Gentle, and so severe! I never saw before; but I
shall hope to find you in a better humor, at some other time Selindra; your
Father interrupts me now.


Unhappy day that I was born, and more unhappy this, that I Periander! my
Father, and my Brothers are all Dead, Murdered by Philocles, Betrayed, and
Slain by Philocles; Pollinesso's dead, my only comfort is for ever gone, and
yet I live to tell it


Madam the Crown of Hungary is now yours, and Philocles but the Instrument
sent by the gods to punish your Parents crimes; their perjury pulled this
Judgment on their own heads


It does not become you my Lord to tell me so, nor yet to think it, if you
consider Lascare's covetous nature, and Philocles ambitious spirit, you might
with me, see all this was designed to ruin my Family, and so to get the Crown
unto themselves; but I shall soon revenge it on dissembling Philocles, and
bring such a Ruin into Greece, as no time shall parallel; -- here to
Pollinesso Ghost, I vow Philocles his Life, if ever I can safely reach it


Madam take heed, least you like them, do pull a second mischief on your self;
Philocles you see is Noble, he leaves the Crown Pollinesso! you have no
Argument against Philocles, he Laments him, as much as you can


I Periander, and in sorrow seeks me too; no doubt, but he would gladly have me
in his power to murder


I cannot think so; but Madam you should now consider where you are, and in
whose power; in my opinion, you must keep this disguise, with all the Art you
can; and lay by your sorrow for a while, not practice any thing toward
revenge, nor by a look discover such a thought, until I can go to Belgrade,
there make Orsanes, and the rest, know that you live; that we may find some way
to fetch you home with safety; where you may with security prosecute your
revenge


I shall take your advice my Lord, now you comply in my revenge, and study to
disguise my grief till your return, but can admit no thoughts, but my revenge
on Philocles; Pollinesso my dear Brother, I will Celebrate thy Funerals, in
such a manner! as shall speak my Love to thee; and hate to him that murdered
thee --

-- No Roman Pile, e're made so great a flame;
I Will Sacrifice this Empire, to thy Name.

Madam, this passion will piscover, and destroy you in spite


I have now done my Lord, indeed I have.


I can have no Faith Madam, unless you will now promise in presence of our
gods, to hide this anger, and not to discover your self till my return, unless
some Eminent necessity require, for you will be lost, when known unto Lascares


I do engage as you desire, and shall --


In tears Selindra! what cause have thou to weep?


My present departure for Ciprus, makes her thus Childish.


Will your stay there be long my Lord?


Not many days Madam.


Come Selindra, thou shall go with me, i will divert these Tears, by showing thee
my griefs, which thou will be Concerned for, if thou do love me


Madam, I am very sensible of your Grief, and do not approve of the Prince his
journey, to search for Astella


You must not only not approve it Selindra, but with me condemn it, as a rash,
and hazzardous undertaking; besides the folly of seeking one he never saw, one
that he has no engagement to! What madness will it be for Philocles, to put
himself within her power? before he knows how she resents her Friends deaths?
for if there were such affection between Astella and Pollinesso, (as is said)
the sight of Philocles, must needs raise a passion in her, such as may destroy
my Philocles;) -- Selindra I do take it ill, that you thus lament your Fathers
absence, who runs no hazard? above my sorrow, for my Brothers dangerous
Journey, in search of Astella


Madam my tears were re-call'd by your Highness sighs, by your trouble for
the Prince his Journey, your favors have been such to me, that I were
unworthy, if I should not weep, as well as smile with you


It Is handsomely put off, -- I thank thee Selindra, and do so little doubt thy
Love, that I do beg thy best Arguments to assist me, that we together may
convince my Brother, and prevail with him to stay


Madam, I shall obey your commands; and observe your directions, as far as
will become me: but I do fear, the Prince will condemn me of much rudeness, if
I shall interpose my vain opinions, against his purposes; good Madam, do not
put me to do, what hereafter you will blame me for


Fear it not Selindra, I love thee better, then to throw away thy credit so! --
see where my brother comes


I have a hard task on me! (to complement the man I hate to death.


Why so sad my deer Sister; your looks speak a sorrow through your smiles!


Can you ask? and know your self to be the cause of it, can Philocles be in
danger? and Ordella, not be sad! can you think smiles would become my face?
when my heart shrinks to think of your rash journey, to seek Astella you know
not where; I can no more put off my fears, then my affection for you


Dearest Ordella, let not a mistaken cause of fear for me, beget such a trouble
in you; there is no danger in my purposed Journey, I shall only search the
Grecian Isles, where none dares do me harm, you know I am engaged in honor to
perform, what I have so publicly declared, and I am sure you love my Honor,
equal with my Person


I do so, and could I see the necessity you urge, to search for Astella, my
passion should submit to your reason, and that I may not flatter my own
affection, I shall now submit unto Selindra's opinion, who has no reason to be
partial to either of our arguments; I prithee good Selindra, speak freely,
what thou thinks't of my brothers Journey


Truly Sir, if I may judge! the Princess tells you what you should better
consider of, then I think you yet have; not that I do apprehend any dangerous
hazzards in the Journey, as she does, nor can I find any arguments fit to
persuade you from attempting dangers, when your Honor calls you to them; give
me leave Sir, only to ask, how your Honor is concerned to make this search?
why do you intend so great a trouble to your self? from whence is this value of
Astella? who you never saw; why does your Highness seek a Woman that has never
oblidged you? nor you her, but by the ruin of her Family, incensed her


It Is true that I have never seen, nor obliged Astella in particular; but I
have by many hazards of my life endeavored both; the Fame of her Excelling
Beauty, and greater Virtue, begot in me a desire to serve her, and her whole
Family, which I did faithfully, in freeing Hungary from the Germane yoke:
'twas an unhappy Fate befell her Parents, by themselves pulled on them, not by
me intended; in which sad loss, I bear so great a share, that I have no peace
within, until I have made my Innocence unto Astellas self appear, that she may
see, that I had no design to hurt the Princes persons, nor to Conquer Hungary


What you have bravely done in that War, deserves a Trophie, and from Astella
no less value, when she shall be well informed of all that past there; 'till
then Sir, the Princess thinks it not fit for you to Visit Astella, because we
often see Great Princes Virtues, does not answer the report Fame gives them


Most true, Selindra, my heart presages a Ruin if you go; could I lay by my
affection to you, and put on Astellas cause, I would undertake to confute those
Arguments, you so much trust in: Methinks I see you kneeling, and the enraged
Astella deaf to all you say, swelling with anger, for brave Pollinesso's loss,
and ready to sacrifice your Life! come Selindra if ever I have deserved love
from thee! show it now by assisting me my own way, by thy best Language: do
thou stand forth, and as Astella, receives my over-confident Brother, spare him
not Selindra, but suppose you had a Brother as dear to you, as Pollinesso
Philocles his rash attempt, sent to his untimely grave: let loose some Tears,
to accompany those I have shed, and for my sake, put on a look so mixed with
Majesty, Grief, and Anger, as may present her Part thou play'st: (I, that look
will do it.


Madam, You see my ready Obedience to your Commands; but will the Prince permit
such boldness


Yes Selindra, since nothing else will satisfy my Sister, I am content for
once, to bear a part in this Child's play, -- on condition Ordella, that you
put off your sadness, if I prevail


I shall, so you will stay at home, if she do get the better of you!


Content: -- can Selindra frown in jest? methinks she looks as if she would do
it to the life Ordella


Yes Philocles, I can frown when I have just cause! and will make thee repent
this rash attempt to visit me, thou have beyond my hope, put thy self into my
power to punish


How that angry Cloud spreads! Can those bright lights suffer an Eclips, and
not portend some fatal Ruin? what if they do! shall I shake at Thunder, that
cannot reach me? be concerned for an unjust anger! no, not though the gods did
threat: -- But Astella will not nourish a thought mis-be-coming her Virtue, nor
so much lessen her great name, by a mistaken passion, to harm a man, whose
endeavors were to serve her


A mistaken Passion Philocles! are not my Father and my Brothers dead? though
not by thy hand butchered, yet by thy attempts they fell; is not the glory of
our name extinguished? the honor of men fallen? all lost in Pollinesso's death


Astellas self is not more free, then I was, from intending evil to her
friends; they forced me to secure my self; by which they were all lost, their
Plots, and Perjuries, pulled this Ruin on them: only Pollinesso was not
Guilty, he would not comply with fierce Barzanes envious designs, nor with his
Fathers blacker purposes; Pollinesso was a witness of my hazards in that
War, and did partake an equal share in them, and in the Victory; we often
sealed our vows of Amity, in our best bloods together, which did beget so
mutual a Love, that our Souls moved ever one way; I would rather have Dyed
with Pollinesso, then live thus to lament his loss; by these unfeigned Tears I
would


Thou speakst a Language so pleasing to my Ears, that I could wish my vow to
Sacrifice thee to my Brothers Ghost, had never past my Lips, for I can see, and
value all thy Noble actions; and judge the guilt of my own friends that fell,
and can bear the loss of all, but Pollinesso! -- he you say dyed Innocent,
free from the other Crimes, full of Honor, rich in Virtue, in the Blossom of
his Age, my only Joy fell: -- and you, my only hate, shall dye so too! your
Worth, your Youth, and your Innocence, will make my oblation acceptable to
those powers I have vowed you too; -- vain man, can thou think Pollinesso's
ghost will be appeased with words? or tears! if thou were ever worthy my
brothers love, show it now, in courageous dying to his memory, for by all our
gods thou dyest; -- a guard there


It Is bravely done Selindra, thou made me start, and shake to see thee look,
and hear thee speak, with such awful majesty! -- how is it Brother? how do you
think Astellas self will receive you? when one so unconcerned, can use you
thus! do you yield yet? have we the better argument?


Yes you have.


You Will stay then!


I think I shall.


My deer, deer Selindra, let me kiss thee, thou have oblidged me beyond my
power to gratify, beyond my expression to acknowledge; -- the Emperor, and the
whole Empire shall thank thee for Philocles his safety; -- come my brother,
let us now find my Father; this change will please him.


How near lost was I, on his fresh mention of Pollinesso's death! how dangerous
a work did I undertake; and how happily brought off, by the Princess Ordellas
timely interruption! -- I thought my self within my strengths at Belgrade, and
Philocles in my power to punish; I must no more of these games, it is my
disguise preserves my life, and I do care only to live to be revenged on
Philocles, the Author of all my sorrows. -- Oh! but the Princess Ordella sits
too near my heart, to suffer that; she is my friend; if I destroy her beloved
brother! I wound her to death; at lest give her the same intolerable grief for
Philocles, I now suffer for Pollinesso. -- Oh! horrid ingratitude! Oh
miserable Astella! my Obligations to Ardella, do infringe my vows to Heaven:
-- ye gods, direct me so; that these differing passions may not distract me; I
would do, what should become me best, and please you most, though my own life,
in the attempt be lost


WHat think you Cecropious, of Philocles his Love?


Mighty Sir, what you have said, was my thought, when I first heard of the
Prince his stay, and had been now my Council, as the best way to secure his
Interest in Hungary, by which Astella must submit unto the will of him, that
has already won hearts of all her people


Sir, you know I have long loved, and long sought Selindra's Love; and Lovers
Eyes are quick to discover the like looks in others; it is my duty (as well as
my own Concern) to tell your Majesty, that I have observed Selindra's good
looks, to be the Orators, that have put off the Prince his journey, not his
kind sisters importunity, and when your own observation, shall inform you
better, your Majesty will find this, no causeless jealousy in me


What he tells you Sir, is the whisper of the Court, but I look on it slightly,
the Prince may have a mind to a Wench, and Selindra is a pretty one; but Sir,
in my opinion, you should take no notice of such youthful passages; the Prince
cannot think her a fit Wife, and then, no matter who is his Mistress


Cecropious I do think it worthy my care, to prevent an evil; the Crown of
Hungary can be no way mine, but by Astella; we see Selindra is rich in Beauty,
and more rich in Virtue; if not by Birth great enough to be his Wife; she is
too good, to be his wanton Mistress; Philocles is young, and young men are apt
to be in Love! He is as gallant, as great, and if his affection should meet a
repulse, (as it is most like from Selindra;) these sparks we now see, may grow
to such a flame, as neither we, nor he can quench: I will observe him, and set
spies on them, Cleonell may be jealous without a cause! I will sift Ordella too


Daughter, you have wrought a good work on your brother; thy Interest I see,
has prevailed, beyond my entreaty, or my Command, I thank thee for it Ordella,
and am glad Philocles, to find that your Ears are open unto reason, indeed
the journey would not have suited with your other great actions; I like well
^hy gallant spirit; but I like not to hazard a Kingdom for a Complement


Sir, I do thus low beg pardon for my first disobedience


Thus let me embrace the greatest comfort of my life, thou Ordella, and thine
Philocles; What wealth is there beyond these? what joys beyond those I feel?
thus supported! I am the envy of Princes; may all the blessings Heaven can
bestow, fall on you both for this love, and this obedience to your old dying
Father; -- tell me Philocles: how stands the aff^ires of Hungary? I have had
late intelligence, that some Commotions do appear there; if so? since you have
thus discreetly laid aside the search of Astella, in my judgment, 'twill be
next best, that you repair to Belgrade with your Army, there by your presence,
to keep the people in Obedience, until Astella be found; we know the
Hungarians are a busy headed people Philocles


Sir, I have left the Government of that State, in those hands that will
neglect no means to invite Astella home; they love her Sir; and do want no
power to secure the Kingdom for her; my presence at Belgrade, would rather
deter Astella, then invite her home, and may be justly thought, I meant to
force, what I yet doubt to sue for: In my opinion Sir, I ought to hear more
from thence, before I stir that way, but my opinion, and my will, shall
submit to your Commands


Thou art still on thy Complements, but my gray Hairs are not convinced by
such Arguments, think better on what I propose, though I do not command, but
only wish it; while I instruct your


I shall obey you Sir, and weigh well what you have said, I shall not be
wanting in my care for Selindra, nor in my love unto my Brother


I am satisfied Ordella, and do only wonder why he will not lead the Army into
Hungary! where such apparent need is of his presence


He will go, if you will have him Sir.


I will think further on it a day or two.


Cleonel I see loses no time, in the War he makes, ply her hard young man,
those knit brows do often prove the Cipher to a smiling heart, and yet Cleonel
I must tell you, that I approve not this whining way of Wooing; most Women like
to be approached with such Alacrity, as shows the mettle men are made of;
where is thy heart young man


Mighty Sir, one frown from bright Selindras Eyes, has power to shake me into
Attomes, to unman me quite


I think so, and must my self Woo for thee, how is it fair Cleonel brings
with him? he is a man in my Eye worthy the greatest subject of my Empire: -- Or
is it the nice Lovers part you thus do act in Public, while your united
hearts delight in private? say Selindra, when shall our Court flourish in
triumphs for your Wedding? -- while Ordella provides Ornaments for you, it
shall be my care to set forth Cleonel like himself, and fit for such a
Mistress: -- tell me when Selindra, when shall this jolly time be? come I must
press you for my Friend


I am very sensible of this Honor you now do me Sir, yet cannot choose but
wonder why your Majesty thinks fit to press me to a public Answer


You have delayed it long enough, it is a good time to declare now.


I obey Sir, and do confess that I have ever had a true value of Cleonels
worth; I have also observed your favor to hm, and do believe that he may make
the best of Women happy; but yet I think not fit to entertain his Love, I have
more Noble thoughts, then to encourage him with hopes, of what I never can
afford him, such a return, as his merit may justly expect from one more worthy
then my self; I must declare that my purpose is not to marry, but to attend the
Princess so long, as that honor may be permitted, and her Highness favor
shall continue to me


May all thy wishes be ever on thee, happy will that man be, that gets such a
Treasure, as this fair Cabinet contains: I am vanquished Cleonel, and I advise
thee to tear this Serpent from thy heart, before it be too big for thee to
graspe; -- (observe you this Ordella?) -- Philocles are thy thoughts yet for
Belgrade


They shall be Sir, if you Command it.


Ordella can you guess, why my Father does now urge my absence? that so late
enforced my stay


Does not the Affairs of Hungary require you there?


No Ordella, I should not then wonder at his pressing me to go!


Madam, the Emperor calls for you.


I Will over take him presently; -- I have much to say to you Brother, pray stay
my return: good Selindra entertain him in my Chamber, with Cleonels last
Melancholy Song, I like so well


Cloris we see the offended Gods,
At first do show, and shake their Rodds,
That they may rather threat, then strike,
So we foregoe, what they dislike:
These faulty streams, shall flow no more
Above their banks, as heretofore:
Nor swelling tempest from my breast,
Henceforth thy Virgin cares molest:
All shall be fashioned to thy will,
So thou will let me Love thee still:
My Lips shall not a word let go,
That may offend to tell thee so:
But to dissemble, or deny
That I do Love thee were a lie,
Would stain my soul: 'twill prove a spot,
To look as if I Loved thee not.
This charity becomes you Madam, and Cleonels lines I see are smiled on, though
himself be not, but why did you with such severity, in public disclaim his
interest, and seem to reject a man so worthy, when the Emperor himself woed for
him


It Is the Princess Ordellas pleasure, that I should learn his Song Sir, and not
my fancy to the maker of it, though his love, and respects, may challenge a
greater complement from me, for I shall ever acknowledge obligations to Cleonel,
yet not think fit to treat a Marriage in my Fathers absence, by whom I shall be
wholly ruled in that matter, if he think fit to make that choice for me, I must
submit


Give me leave Madam so far to interest my self in your Affairs, as to ask
if your thoughts for Cleonel be such, that you will Cleonel, to gain Selindra,
do but --


I beg your Highness pardon, for some time.


Thus to leave me while I was speaking to her, is a scorn I looked not for; --
Selindra was not wont to be so rude, nor I so foolish, sure my looks and
Language rendered me Ridiculous, so slight, that she blushed for me, which to
hide she thus withdrew, leaving me to wonder at my self, that am of late
become, what I want a Name for; -- If this be Love, and this the effects of
Love, I Will tear the Monster from my heart, and be my self again, before it
grow too mighty for me; -- my hands cannot reach it, no force can touch it,
it is a subtle foe, not to be compelled; it is reason only must prevail; --
Selindra loves, and dissembles her affection to Cleonel, neglecting me; -- how
unworthy then am I, that seek to separate united hearts; how fond, to Covet
what another does enjoy; how much am I now fallen below my self, by this
passion


When went my brother hence Selindra?


He sits there Madam.


My Father I fear has too much cause for what he said; Prithee leave us a while
Selindra, and let none disturb us


Oh Selindra!


She is not here, why do you stare thus on me? are you not well?


Only a little dull for want of sleep Ordella; but why sent the Emperor for
you in such haste


To tell me that Philocles does love Selindra, and to enquire my thoughts of
it; I answered boldly, that you were too Noble to dishonor Selindra, and too
wise to neglect Astella and a Crown, for such an idle fancy; -- I have
confirmed him that you have not such a thought, because I saw him troubled at
it; -- but what is this that thus distracts you


Ha! what says my dearest Sister?


Ye Gods defend that I be not mistaken; Brother what have you done with your
self, since I went hence


My head is full of the Affairs of Hungary, I was contriving how I should
secure Astella in her Throne, and thinking of a thousand other things; but why
did my Father send for thee


This is very strange, I told you why, and you regard me not, it was about
Selindra


About Selindra; prithee Ordella let us talk of something else, -- thou
weepest


How can I choose but weep! to see you thus distracted, and all my hopes of
future joys dying in me? -- Philocles has left to love me, he dares not trust
me with his heart! he Loves, and by dissembling seeks to hide his love from me,
that can dye for him


I am guilty Ordella, thy charms overcome me, and I do submit to thy severest
judgment, I do love Selindra, and would do more then thou can fancy, to gain
her Love; now my heart lies open, thou will find the wound is deep Ordella,
touch it gently my dear Sister


'Twill not be cured then Philocles, I must lance it to the quick, and you
must endure to hear, that Cleonel, and she, have been long contracted, and
only do disguise their Loves, because Cecropius seeks Selindra for himself,
it is only until her Fathers return, they thus dissemble it


Contracted Ordella! thou have blasted all my hopes, destroyed me in the
twinkling of an Eye, the Gods have not a greater curse in store to throw upon
me, is this thy cure? I shall sink under the burden of this remedy! farewell
Ordella, farewell for ever! for I am undone for ever


Stay Philocles, I can cure thee yet; I Will stroke thy wound, and try how that
will work, they are not contracted, that I ever heard, it was my pure affection
that thus abused your Ears: by my Fathers command, I was in the bud to crush
your love, which by their pretended Contract, I thought best to do: can my
Brother pardon my Zeal to serve him this way? and yet trust my love


I can do both Ordella, now thou have restored me to life again; come let us
sit, that I may at large declare my purpose concerning Selindra, -- do you
remember Ordella, that day you made Selindra act Astella? how I was then
convinced, and overcome by her; how she spoke then! and with what Majesty she
appeared! Methought then, if Selindra were not borne a Queen, yet she was
designed to be one! from the hour I loved her, (and you the occasion of my
love,) I have since observed her strictly, and well weighed all her
perfections, and considered Cleonels hopeless suit to gain her: if she can
afford me love Ordella; I would wade deep in blood, -- it would look like
vanity, to tell thee how great things I would do to win a value from her


When I consider Selindra's Beauty, and her worth, I cannot blame your
admiration of her, truly Brother, I do wish your desires upon you, but know not
how I can comply, or how to serve you this way


I have weighed all kinds of Arguments Ordella, and do allow them to be good
worldly thoughts, fit for Princes that have no other heaven on Earth then their
Wealth, and their Dominions! -- I tell thee Ordella to be Emperor of all the
World! is poverthy, without Selindra! if thou love me, thou will use thy
interest to persuade her to cast off all thoughts for Cleonel, and receive me,
who she yet shuns* -- now my Sister, speak comfort to my soul; that must
languish until you engage for me


I have been thus long silent Philocles, to consider how I might comply with
your desires, and not break my Fathers trust, do but show me an honorable way,
and I will serve you with the same Zeal you wish it; but if I should consent?
how can you avoid Cleonel? or how disguise your love from my Father


We Will think of twenty ways to blind the old man's eyes, and as for Cleonel, I
will so overload him with Wealth, and Honors, that he shall gladly give up his
interest in Selindra, (if he have any!) but if he refuse! I will become his
Rival publicly, I will either carr^ the fair prize, or loose my self
Ordella; say now, will you strain a Co^^plement with my Fathers trust to save
thy brothers life and honor


Pardon me heaven! if I offend by varying from my (...)there is trust, to save my
Brothers life and Honor! Philocles now I am yours, employ me like a Sister
that you love, put me not to use artifices unworthy of that value, the World
now holds me at


By all our Gods, I Will rather perish, then permit thee to act any thing
unworthily: Dearest Ordella loose no time to make known my affection to
Selindra, while I seek Cleonel, to make him mine


Since no argument can prevail against your passion, I am content to be
directed by you


Thou will make me happy then Ordella! beyond all the State arguments. --

-- The greatest Politician can invent,
Or brightest messenger from Heaven's sent.

This falls out well for my designs upon Selindra, the Prince his absence,
will give me opportunity to effect, what his presence might prevent, for it is
now most evident that Selindra slights my Professions in hope of Philocles,
who is become my Rival; by subtilties I must therefore compass, what my power
and credit cannot reach: the Prince is too mighty for me, to contest with? but
this new


I Will share the Empire with him if he consent! if he will not! I Will force my
way. --


Sir, The Emperor sent me to signify unto you the News from Belgrade, that
Astella is arrived there, and is rejected by those you left to govern; it is his
pleasure Sir, that you prepare to march, with all possible speed to her relief


I have just now received an express from thence, which inform me of a Faction
there, that did hope to have set up a Counterfeit Astella, but those Tumults
are allayed, the plot being discovered, all the partakers fled the Country; I
therefore hold it fit to hear again from thence, before I stir: but if my
Father will needs have his Army march into Hungary, I shall advise him to
confer the honor of that War, Cleonell on you


On me Sir, I am neither worthy, nor capable of so great a charge; your
Highness does me much honor in this thought, but I must not presume to accept
the favor, lest the Emperor do think me so vain to seek it


Why Cleonel? thy forward youth promises great things, and I know the Emperor
will be pleased to see me join to heap honors on thy deserving head; I will
undertake it with my Father, and shall not doubt to say, thou will deserve the
sole Command of all our Forces


If the Emperor consent, I am cozened; your Highness does (...) load me with
your Favors, I shall not live to express my Gratitude, much less to merit
such honors


I tell thee Cleonel, it is in thy power to lay an Obligation on me, such an
Obligation Cleonel, as half my Empire cannot recompense; -- Say, may I hope
such kindness from thee? but if it be not in thy heart, do not flatter me into
a hope of what I shall not find


Sir as you are my Prince, my duty binds me to serve you with the hazard of my
life, and fortunes


I thank thee for thy Love, as I do all that will like thee, say, and do as
much, but I would have engagements unto thee, beyond the common complement of
other Subjects


Your many favors Sir, have so much obliged me beyond all others, that your
commands (what ere they be) shall make me happy


Take heed Cleonel, do not engage too fast; for I shall demand, what thou
hold'st dearer then thy life; dare thou hear me now


Speak boldly Sir, I am yours, and all that is mine is so; I hope


Thou art indeed my fate, or I am thine, -- I would have thee give up to me,
thy interest in Selindra, dissolve all engagements, between her and you: -- my
dearest friend; thus thou may bequeath Greece


Without Selindra!


I, without Selindra!


What is all Greece worth? without Selindra! good Sir, give me leave a little
to consider on this matter; -- sure he has solicited Selindra for himself, and
received a repulse; -- it may well be, that she has expressed to him, some
value of me, beyond what I my self can yet discern; he would not else thus
rashly, nay thus madly tempt me! it is so: -- Sir, do I mistake, or you did
demand, that I should give my interest in Selindra, up to you


Thou do not mistake, it is only that can make me happy.


And only that I cannot grant, I can no more consent to part with the hope of
such a happiness, then with my interest in Heaven; pray Sir, find some other
way to try my Faith


The Gods cannot give thee a means to oblige me another way, themselves cannot
bless me with a gift, that I can prize beyond Selindra


And you would have me debauch this young Lady, for your private pleasure?


By all that is Holy, I would marry her.


Marry her! what shall then become of Hungary, and Astella?


Thou shall have that Crown, and her; I Will woe her for thee, I Will fight that
Conquest over again, and give it thee, if she refuse


Will you get the Emperors coment, to this exchange?


Yes, or I will do it without him.


(All this shall to the Emperor,) but if you can do neither? this


Will it be thrown away, if placed on me?


I might have put my words into a Courtlier phrase I do confess; but I can
never mould my heart to such a form, as shall consent to make my tongue bettay
it: I swear by all that is good, I never can relinquish my interest in Selindra;
I do prize my weak hopes there, above all the Wealth, and Honors, you can lay
down to purchase it


He has abused me all this while; to get the secret out, which shall now
consume him; since he will not consent, this base treachery, shall be my first
step to climb unto Selindra


I shall now persuade Lascares to believe, that the Prince loves Selindra: --
while he is musing, I Will steal off, lest a tempest do fall


Stay Cleonel, I have more to say; I have considered my rash suit, and cannot
with Justice, quarrel with thee, for not parting with such a Treasure as
Selindra is; but I must call thee to account for thy late smiles, and false
fawning on me, and for thy base treacherous kindness, by which thou have
betrayed me to reveal a secret, too great to trust thee with: -- Thus I lay by
my greatness, and as a private injured man, I draw my Sword to kill thee


But I must not lift up mine against my Prince, I have been ever taught to draw
my Sword in your defense, and shall be as glad to serve you with it, as I
should be proud to use it in this cause against any other man; I dare scarce
show it you Sir.


I have now made my self thy equal, by my rivalship in love; either defend thy
self, or by heaven I Will kill thee


What insolence is this, so near us? Cleonel this posture does not become you,
in this place


You will pardon it Sir, when you shall know I only drew to save my life, not
to offend the Prince, who swelling with rage, came like a ruin on me, because
I would not quit my interest in Selindra unto him, to be his wife Sir


Is this true Cleonel?


You Will find it true Sir, I could have had Astella, and her Crown for my
consent; it is some pleasure to deny another, what I cannot get my self


He has not hurt thee?


Not much Sir, you came in just as he fell on me.


This must be timely cared for; Cecropius send presently and fetch Selindra to
your Lodgings, this night she shall be your charge, to morrow let her be sent
back to Ciprus to her Father; and be you sure Cecropius, that Philocles do
neither see her, nor send to her this night


She is here Sir, with the Princess.


Where is my Brother Sir?


He is gone hence hurt Ordella, (I wish he were else) fighting forsooth for
Love! you now see what mischief your fondness to Selindra, has produced; your
Brothers life endangered, and the Empire tottering: Cecropius take Selindra to
your care, as I commanded, let her be sent home, attended as befits her
quality: -- Ordella come you with me


Leave us a while Cleonel, -- Madam, you now see the evils I foretold, are come
to pass, these young fiery spirits, will never submit to suffer either to
enjoy you: do but consider how happy you may be, by being mine, though I am not
so young; yet many men of my years have made young Ladies happy: of my love,
you have had long trial, my Power, my Honors, and my Wealth, will prove as
pleasant, as the smooth chin of Cleonel: -- Philocles his Wife you cannot be,
his Mistress I hope you scorn to be; much may be said Lady, on this argument,
but the time allows it not, to morrow early you must to Sea, unless you will
bless me, by being mine


Is it even so my good Father? I shall show you a trick for


My Lord, I must now give you the same answer I have ever done, that I can
never have affection for you


No matter, few old men's wives have any.


My Lord, I do submit unto the Emperors commands, pray let me be sent away.


It Is my humble love, begets this contempt! -- I must try Hungary to Greece, by
Philocles his match with Astella, and how much he abhorres his love to you, is
evident: The truth is Selindra, you are this night by his command, to be
ravished by my Son Cleonel, to that end sent thither, which will allay the
gallant Prince his appetite to marry you, and remove all further fears of that
matter: It Is yet in your own power Madam by obliging me, to prevent Cleonels
force, who for undertaking so base an act, ought to be dispis'd


Ravished, I Will rather dye, then suffer Cleonel, or yield to be your Wife, the
Gods will not permit such wickedness


Please you to retire unto your Lodging Lady: -- There is no Girl, I am angerd
even to hate her, yet cannot choose but love her; -- but why should I loose this
opportunity? I may now do, what I only invented for Cleonel, -- I shall curse
my self when she is gone, and when no possibility is left, wish it had been so:
it shall be; -- if when I have ravished her, she can consent, I Will marry her,
if she will not, I Will poison her, and being dead at Sea, hire the Mariners to
throw her overboard, I will about it while my Blood is high! --

-- Venus propitious be to my design:
I Will offer Insence only at thy Shrine.

GIven to Cecropius custody! that is to Cleonels embraces; I must see her: --
is Cecropious, or Cleonel within


They are Sir.


Is Selindra yet at rest?


Yes Sir, long since.


Is it so late? I do believe you do mistake, and she is not;


The Emperor has given command, that neither your highness, nor any from you,
should visit Selindra; besides Sir, all within are now at rest


My Fathers command! this is some design from Cleonel:


We know not Sir.


Hark, the same noise again, it is within -- stand by, -- Villains give way, or
I shall force my passage through your hearts, -- by Selindra's voice! she calls
for help too


Help, oh help! murder, murder.


By my Fathers soul, I will strike with thee Philocles.


Thou dare not be so barbarously base, to harm such innocence!


Philocles, I have thus long winked at your follies, hoping that my mildness
would have begot a better temper in you, but I now see your sore requires a
Corisive: go to your Lodgings, and as you value my displeasure, move not from
thence without my leave; -- you of the Guard, wait upon the Prince, and let him
not stir out, as you Cecropius, let all leave us but your self; -- and now
inform me of this Fray, and how he came hither, against my Command.


Mighty Sir, the Prince forced my servants from the Door, and found me
threatening Selindra; and frighting of her, as if I meant a Rape, which I only
feigned; intending to take off Philocles his affection that way, by which he
might apply his thoughts toward Astella, for if the Prince should marry
Selindra! how can Hungary be yours? this Sir, is the truth


I wish thou had done, what thou only talkest of, for this young man, will
ruin all my hopes of Hungary, if we do not prevent him! -- it must be poison
Cecropius; I see no less will do it; Selindra


And shall Sir, if you so direct; by to morrow night it shall be done.


Be it so then, 'twill be the least evil; and the only way to secure all the
rest; let her be poisoned


Poison her, my curiosity was to good purpose at this time; was ever gray
hairs so wicked? how to prevent this mischief I know not; -- Selindra will
never credit it from me; yet I will urge her hard, and if I do get belief, and
by this means bring my designs to pass! I shall find Doors too strong for
Philocles to force: -- Love and Venus guide me


Hold Cleonel, if thou presumest to touch me, this Knife shall be my rescue.


Will this distance, with my obedience, and my humility remove Selindra's self
I swear, my only business is to save that life you threaten; -- does my heart
and my looks so ill agree? that you can fear harm from me


Art not thou Cecropius's Son? and does not his wild blood, run in thy
veins


No Madam, I am no whit allied unto Cecropius the Ravisher; he was a Man when
he made me, and is now become a Monster; such as I dread to see Selindra under
his Roof


My Lord, that posture does neither become you, nor me, -- pray


You will pardon my approach when you shall know the cause of this unseasonable
Visit; I have by accident over heard the Emperor, give my Father order to
poison you, and he is providing to do it, this next night


I am glad to hear they are grown so merciful, death is less dreadful then
his Rape, -- but how can I credit this from you? and how avoid it, if I do


Can Selindra believe, my love could ere conceal such a mischief? or that I
will omit any endeavor, to preserve her from it


Were not Cleonel a kin to the Ravisher; I might believe he would detect a
Poysoner


If I tell you a false word, may sudden plagues seize on me, and if you please
to make me the blessed Instrument of your escape; the Honor will be ample
recompense for any hazard I shall run: I have Madam, a strong Castle within
the Forest, about a League from hence, thither I can convey you first, and
then whither you please


Pray my Lord leave me a few minutes, that I may consider Hungary: -- I like
well to fly from this near death, but I like not to trust my self to Cleonel;
there may be more danger at his Castle, then in the death I would fly from; if
I discover my self unto Ordella! she will solicit me for Philocles (who I
must ever hate) this will prove more desperate then all the rest: -- I must
trust Cleonel, though Belgrad, (and not to your Castle) I have friends in
Hungary, who will protect me, and there I shall have time to consider of your
hazzards for me


By our Household gods I swear to do it, by this fair hand, I will observe my
Oath, and what ever else you shall command me: -- though it be late, we must
this night depart, you must make ready, while I take order for my Servants, and
my Horses


May I not see the Princess e're I go? will not to morrow night be time enough?


To morrow night brings death, beyond all power to hinder; we should be going
while we talk: -- Let no fears disturb you Madam, I can command the opening of
the ports at any hour; all shall be according to your wish


Heaven grant it Cleonel; --
-- When I remember the strict vow you made,
It were Impiety to be afraid.

Let the Boy only stay, and sing the Song I like.

Come, come, thou glorious object of my sight,
Oh my Joy! my Life, my only Delight!
May this glad minute be
Blessed to Eternity.
See how the glimmering Tapors of the Sky,
Do gaze, and wonder at our Constancy.
How they crowd to behold!
What our arms do infold!
How all do envy our Feliceties!
And grudg the Triumphs of Selindras Eyes:
How Cynthia seeks to shroud
Her Cressent, in you Cloud!
Where sad Night puts her sable mantle on,
Thy light mistaking, hastes to be gone;
Her Gloomy shades give way,
As at the approach of day;
And all the Planets shrink, in doubt to be
Eclipsed by a brighter Deity.
Look, Oh look!
How the small
Lights do fall,
And Adore,
What before
The heavens have not show'n!
Nor their God-heads known:
Such a faith!
Such a Love!
As may move
Mighty Jove
From above
To descend; and remain,
Amongst Mortals again.

Enough boy begone.


Thou art welcome Ordella, let us sit, and talk sadly.


My coming is to divert this sadness which you too much indulge.


Does not my sorrow become me Ordella? can thou wish me merry, when thou
considerest my Condition? who is there now in Greece more scorned then
Philocles


Who more honored? thy Victories shine bright upon thee, thy Virtues are
unparalled, thy self adored by thy own Subject, and by other Nations coveted;
let not my brother provoke the gods, by his ingratitude


Thou art mistaken my dear Sister, I am not that Philocles thou meanest; not
he that chased the Germans out of Hungary, I am one that Cleonel dares Rival,
and with a single Arm, can check my force; a poor contemned prisoner I am, a
man with half a soul thou see; do I not become my Goal


I am sad my self to hear you talk thus; -- but, my Brother, your affairs do
require your present Counsel; pray let us consider how Selindra may be secured
from farther danger


Is Selindra in danger? speak Ordella, what danger? who dares threaten her?


You mistake me Brother, I was about to tell you that ^n my opinion, she will
be safe at Ciprus, and do think fit when she takes leave of me, to let her know
your love, and resolution to marry her, which will soon dash Cleonels hopes;
this I could not yet do, by reason she was so suddenly committed to Cecropius;
-- your looks do fright me, and your unquiet thoughts, will ruin you


Thou art my only comfort, thou shall still direct, and I Will obey, prithee
Ordella chide me when I do amiss; methinks thy looks speak good success; I do
approve her absence for a while at Ciprus, because you like it, and I will have
patience too, because you say it is fit


Patience will become you best, and best suit with your affairs.


Thou Councell'st well Ordella, but can not fancy what a broken heart
endures; -- my whole soul labors under the burden of my Love, and to that is
added her neglects more weighty, and to this double load, my Fathers unjust
anger falls up on me, as if I were not sinking fast enough before


My Fathers anger will be soon over.


I wish it not Ordella, may his fierce anger urge him on to my destruction, it
will be handsomer to fall so, then to perish by Selindra's scorns


You raise imaginary evils that are not; I am confident Selindra has no thought
for Cleonel, nor can I doubt but she will meet your love, with as bright a
flame as yours is


Oh! that I could suffer such a hope, or such a thought possess me; I would
then meet my Fathers frowns, and blow away his thunder; did Selindra love me! I
would wage a second War with heaven, to gain her, and be more proud to fall her
Martyr in so high attempt! then sit next to Jove, with her neglects upon me


Madam, the Emperor sent me to see if Selindra were here with you.


What means my Father by this? Is she not a Prisoner with Cecropius?


She was, but is now missing, at which Cecropius is half mad.


Madam, I come to let you know that by daybreak Cleonel, with Selindra past
the Ports, and about two hours after, were met on that way, that leads to his
Castle


Let them that love me follow me.


Traitor, Villain: -- stay all; I do command you stay Antillachus: -- See the
Court-Gates locked, that none go after him; -- Cecropius do you retire and look
to your hurt, he meant it at thy heart old Man; may thy Sons good Sword revenge
it on him, if they meet, and he fall under it


Oh Sir! Let not your curses follow my Brother, he has Afflictions enough
without them


Peace Ordella, thy tenderness does too much nourish thy Brothers follies, I
would rather he should not be, then be thus E^^eminate; I have fought many
Battles, and done great things to settle this Empire; and think you it will be
kept, and Governed by a heart with a Dart in it


Good Sir, let not my Brothers single error put from your memory all his great
Actions, if you would speak mildly to him of his Love, I do believe your
Arguments may move him more, then all this rigor can; he has a Noble Spirit,
such as you did like, and I know he loves you Sir


Let me know when he returns.


Are any gone after Philocles?


Yes Madam, we think Antillacus is gone with Antenor.


But can they overtake him time enough, before he reaches Cleonel?


No doubt they may*


Not yet gone Antillacus?


Madam, all the Court-Gates, are by the Emperors express command locked up,
and Guards set, that no man now can pass


Is it not madness to hazard him alone against Cleonel and his company? My
Lords, do you mean to give obedience to this rash command? and suffer
Philocles to perish thus; when my Fathers anger is allayed, he will curse your
modesty, if not punish it, in case my Brother do miscarry


Madam, we have no way to follow the Prince, unless your self command the
Guards to let us pass


Come then with me; I will stand my Fathers anger when it goes highest, rather
then let my Brother fall thus neglected


Those at the Castle, do not hear of Cleonel, nor expect him there; sure
Antillacus did mistake them, or I him, which way now to take I know not: --
It Is strange Antillacus and Antenor stay so long, I must not quit this Road,
until they come: -- Hark I hear men and Horses within the Wood, my business
is to search every where: Love guide me to her Rescue, or my Death


How is it now Madam? your Spirits seem to be returned, are you yet strong
enough to ride on? we have rested long


I hope I am, 'twas the blow which the bough gave my head, makes me thus ill,
the bushes kept me from the ground, so that my fall could not hurt me


The day is far spent Madam, and we shall be no sooner mist, then followed;
pray let us to horse, there is a place near, where we may rest for one night
secure


My head grows diszey with this little motion, I fear I cannot sit upon my
Horse yet; -- methinks you might hide me here in these thick bushes until
night, and when it is dark, find some better means to carry me away


'Twill not be safe to stay longer, so near our Enemies.


It Is Cleonel; -- turn this way Traitor:


Take the Prince without harm, if you can.


Am I not worthy thy own Sword Ravisher?


I beg your patience Sir; -- and do command thine Cleonel, but here me speak, I
do conjure you both, -- Philocles, brave Prince, look on me with pity, and on
Cleonel with justice; my life being sought several ways by Lascares, and
Cecropius, I have endeavored to preserve by flight; you must therefore look on
Cleonel as trusted, and employed by me, being engaged by Oath to carry me to
Belgrade, to my Friends there


Thou art betrayed Selindra, lost for ever; this is not the way to Belgrade,
you are now within a mile of his Castle, this way leads to no other place; --
thou persidious Villain, can thou smile at such a treachery


Yes Philocles, and will be my own carver now, I must be first served here: --
do you two carry her to Horse, I Will soon over take you


To Horse Cleonel; -- I Will rather dye, then stir a foot that way.


Force her to Horse, we have no time to talk.


Force her! thou cursed slave, I Will sacrifice thee ere she goes.


The gods preserve the Prince; help, help, murder, treason, treason: --


Let some help those that cry, let others search the Wood, I Will toward the
clashing Swords; -- how is this! three to one


Cursed be that Woman, accursed our Fate to loose our prince


Now the blood issues at the wound, it may prove not mortal.


The blood only choked him as he lay, you see his Eyes look cheerfully.


Ye Gods, if any do take care of Hungary, look down on Pollinesso, and restore
him to us


What Is that he said? -- was it Pollinesso that he named?


The King will live, thanks to heaven for his deliverance.


They call him King too; Pollinesso's name, gives me Strength; -- but that face
is none of mine, and yet that name makes that face lovely to me; -- How I fool
my self with vain hopes, of what cannot be


How is it Sir? your looks are lively, and your wound, though it did at first
seem desperate, is not very dangerous


My tongue moves heavily, and painfully, loss of blood makes me faint too; --
how shall I travel with these wounds? -- my stay here will be very dangerous,
and my Journey to Belgrade, too long for one so weak as I am


The same Gods that have preserved you to this day, will not let you fall thus.


They talk of Belgrade too; who can this be? -- give me way, that I may gaze
on this wonder


Away wild Woman, thou Author of this mischief.


He looks up again! those Eyes are mine, I know 'um now!


Throw her off, tear her away, she disturbs him, sure she is mad.


It Is you are mad, it is you that love him not; why do you hail me thus?
whither will you dragge me? did you not call him Pollnesso


Yes.


King Pollinesso!


I think we did.


That name is mine, those wounds are mine then!


I wish they were.


And so do I with all my heart, pray let me go to him, I can heal him with my
tears; -- I Will suck his wounds well, for I have heard wounds have been cured so


How comes his name in her mouth.


'Twas not well done of us, to name him as we did, best to strangle her, lest
she discover us


Shall I shoot her in the head? though the Act be horrid, it is better she
perish, then all we


Let us first hear what she will say to him, we shall have time enough to kill
her after


I pray who are all you?


We are the hurt man's servants Lady, pray who are you? by whom we have received
such damage


If my Eyes deceive me not, I may be happy; but am yet, the most miserable,
accursed Woman living


I think so too. --


What Woman is that weeps so?


It Is she you rescued Sir.


Did I rescue her? -- loss of blood makes my Eyes dazzle, and my fancy work
even to a lightness; that Face brings to my memory something that I have
known: -- why does she weep? and why do you hold her so rudely Tenedor


In charity to me Sir, though they know it not, for had they sooner let me know
that Pollinesso lived! my sudden joy had slain me


What is this she says?


She is a Witch Sir I think.


Does not my Brother know me yet? have my sorrows wrought such a change, that
Pollinesso should not know me


Oh! my Astella, pardon my dull sight; for I am very weak.


Would I had dyed, rather then be rescued at this rate, so joyful, and so sad a
day I have not seen before


He does but slumber Madam, and it is good he should do so.


But slumber say you, it looks so like death! that I would dye to see it!


Madam, the Joy will outlive the sorrow of this day, the Prince's hurt is
without danger; -- can your goodness pardon the rude words which my self, and
these Lords in our distraction speak


Alas my Lord, I was not sensible of what you said, my mind was so o're-loaden
with my griefs, and so intent on Pollinesso! that I heard you not; Now while my
Brother takes this rest, pray make me know how he escaped, when my Father and
Barzanes fell, and why he has been thus long concealed


Madam, in that sad day, Pollinesso in vain attempting to save his Father, was
with my self, and these you see here, cast on a sandy bank, from whence by good
swimming we got to shore, and have been since disguised for fear of Lascares,
in several Princes Courts soliciting for aid, to force the Grecians to quit
their stolen possession of Hungary; when in the midst of Pollinesso's
preparation, he hears that Philocles had resigned the Crown to be preserved
for you; This made us lay aside all further preparation for a War, and thus
disguised to pass this way to Belgrade: It seems by destiny directed to your
recsue


I shall find some fitter time for my own story, 'twere good that we removed my
Brother, -- he wa^kes: -- how are you Sir, has this repose refresht you


I am something better then I was Astella, and shall soon be well, now I may
look on thee


And I most happy! my brother you must give us leave to remove you to some
place of rest, and safety, and you must be still concealed; which these new
wounds, with your Perriwig will be disguise enough


I shall be directed by you.


You must also a little counterfeit your voice, lest you be remembered by it;
for should Lascares know who were in his power, all his hopes of Hungary would
vanish, until he saw you dead; I am called Selindra here


Who were those Robbers? and how came you amongst them?


'Twas Cleonel, who did beguile me, after he had sworn to carry me to Belgrade,
was conveying me to his own Castle


Was not Cleonel Cecropins's son? and will not his death, be our ruin if we
stay here


My interest in the Princess Ordella, will secure you, and his guilt was such a
crime, as can expect no justice from the Law to touch you; besides the rescue
you brought the Prince, will merit a reward, -- but where is Philocles? where
is the Prince! we are all lost indeed, if he be fallen: I have been so much
distracted, that I mist him not till now


What Prince mean you Madam?


Prince Philocles! 'twas he my brother rescued; run, look, search about the
Wood, for heaven sake search; -- unfortunate Astella, and unworthy, that could
thus long forget him; now Polliness^ lives! I have no hate to Philocles;
methinks his virtues now look gloriously upon him -- but how shall I look on
Ordella? if her beloved brother have lost his life, to save my honor


Was it Philocles that I found fighting with Cleonel and his two men?


'Twas he.


It Is strange I knew him not, but I now remember as I came in, he did pursue
the man that fled into the Wood, -- (let some look that way,) Selindra I must
glory in my wounds, that have saved thee from false Cleonel, and relieved
Philocles, who my soul thirsts to see, next thy self most dear to me


And mine trembles at his absence.


Selindra, Selindra, is Selindra safe? -- has she any mercy yet for Philocles?


She is safe and happy too, now she sees you alive Sir; my heart is so much
disturbed by my fears and joys, that I know not how to express


My Wounds are but slight scratches when Selindra smiles; my joys are much
more dangerous then my Wounds


My life Sir, and my honor you have saved, I must look on you with devotion!
pray be pleased to own these our Redeemers, and give them some assurance of
your Protection, they fear Cleonel's death may by Cecropius's power with the
Emperor, prove their destruction


I will be their security, Selindras Redeemers shall command my life; of what
Country are they


Hungarians Sir, Men that since the late War, have sought Fortunes in
Foreign Lands, and now on private Affairs, were returning home


Unto you Sir, I have a great Obligation, such as my whole Life shall express
my Zeal to serve you, for by you Selindra lives


Sir, I am rewarded much above my merit, and shall bless the occasion that
gave me power to serve you


Sir, the Emperor's much enraged at Cecropius's hurt you gave him, and at your
departure, staid us till now; -- Is this Cleonels, or your own blood Sir


It Is neither, Cleonel fell by that Noble hand, whose timely aid delivered
Selindra from a Rape, and me from death; My Arm Antillacus, is grown weak of
late, and thy good Sword so dull, it will do nothing in my hand


But Sir, how comes it that you thus neglect your Wounds.


I have business of more weight to think on, now Selindra smiles: -- Antenor,
pray haste you back unto Ordella, and desire her to be the first relator of
Cleonels death, bid her tell my Father of his horrid Treachery, and let her
magnify these strangers sent by the gods to save the innocent, and to chastise
the perjured Ravisher; make haste Antenor, and tell Ordella that I am in
Paradise


She will be glad to hear that you are well Sir.


Well Antenor, why thou art well, and so is he, and he, we are all well; but I
am blessed with all my heart can wish for; tell my Sister the gentle, and the
fair Selindra smiles, and let her think the rest! -- I am all Air, Antillacus
pray thee help me to rub my Wounds, a little smart may let me know that I am
mortal.


If I mistake not Sir, you will find smart enough in your Fathers rage, when he
hears of Cleonels death


Some anger will do well Antillacus, to allay this joy within me.


I have some fears too, lest Cecropius's malice may ruin us, you know his
power Sir


Let not my Divinest Mistress have so mean a thought of my power to serve her,
let not a sad look appear on this day, that you have dain'd to smile on
Philocles: Madam, it is time that we were moving toward the Town, with our
wounded Friend; how must I call him


I think they call him Pollidor; Sir, though my confidence in you be equal to
the value you are pleased to set on me, I cannot choose but fear Lascares's
anger, when I think on Cleonel


Believe me Selindra, I will rather dye, then let them suffer.


Thus let us march in Triumph to the Town,
Aloud proclaiming Pollidor's renown;
While the Arched Heaven do Ecco its content,
To see Selindra freed from Ravishment.

SIr, I beg the due Execution of our Laws on Murderers.


And I Sir, beg mercy for those that have saved my Brothers life.


I may not hearken to thy suit Ordella, the Laws must be inviolable, to pardon
such a Murder, would pull down Vengeance on my own head, on thine too, on all
our Family.


When you remember Cleonels faith, and his many services, I hope Sir you will
not deny me Justice


Cecropius you shall have Justice; -- go you Antenor, and command the Provost
of the City that he seize Selindra, and her fellow Murderers, let them be all
close Prisoners in the black Tower; by to morrow this time, shall their bloods
be shed, as they shed Cleonels


Did you say Selindra should be Prisoner Sir.


I did.


Good Sir, call back Antenor till you have heard me speak.


I may not Ordella.


Who can forbid you to be Merciful? and just? you break the Laws of
Hospitality in this; Selindra is a stranger, she is innocent, and cannot suffer
justly; Cleonel was full of horrid guilt, and was cut off by a just hand; --
the Travelers too, have saved Philocles his life; good Sir, let not Cecropius
malice, persuade you to do, what you will blush to think on after


They shall have Justice, and a Legal Trial.


Oh Sir! where is your wonted mercy? whither is that goodness fled? how have I
lost your favor? that cannot with my Tears, nor Prayers prevale on your
mistaken anger


Is it your Majesty's Command, that Selindra should be a Prisoner?


Must I ask your leave?


Though not my leave Sir, I cannot choose but wonder at such rigor!


You have leave to wonder on.


Thus low Sir, I do humbly beg Selindra's Enlargement, and an equal Trial for
those that rescued us; --


Selindra as chief accessory must abide the Sentence of the Law, in this case
of Cleonel: -- Philocles thy mean Love has drowned all my Favors, and
Eclip'st all thy former actions; from this time I shall study to forget thee,
unless thou will forget Selindra, and lead the Army to relieve Astella


I shall obey you Sir in this, and all things else, so you will be pleased to
send Selindra safe to Ciprus, and set those innocent men free, that saved my
life


Degenerate fool, I shall cure this disease in thee; Cecropius send presently
for the Judges, Command them by virtue of this my Signet, to put the Laws in
present Execution, upon thy Sons Murderers; let the rigor of the Law pass on
them all


Ye Gods, to what purpose are men innocent? why is virtue praised, and taught
us? -- Good Sir, consider how you do murder these innocents, with a show of
Law, and a pretense of Justice


How dare you talk thus?


You make me desperate Sir.


Do not raise my temper higher, lest I cut thee off, as if thou were no part
of me; -- they shall dye


Had the Gods so pleased, I wish my self the meanest of your Subject, for I am
now a slave unto your passions, and must inherit the curse that is due to all
your guilts, such as I shake to think on; It Is you Sir, that have murdered
Cleonel, 'twas your poison that Selindra fled from; by your confining me, you
gave Cecropius first, and Cleonel next, the power to become Ravishers; pray let
the Law take notice of this! -- It may free innocent persons


Who am I? Is this Gallant my Son, or my Sovereign?


Sir I do see fire, and fury in your Eyes, and am prepared to meet it, it is
better to dye with those are Noble, then to live thus neglected; by my hand two
of Cleonels men fell, it is I am guilty of that sin of rescuing Selindra from a
Rape: let your Justice, and your Laws, grow famous by my blood, 'twill please
Cecropius well; by all our Gods I*le not outlive those innocents


It Is fit to take thee at thy word.


It will become your own hand best.


Have you another Son Sir, when you have slain my Brother?


Antenor, call in my Guard, and carry Philocles to the New Castle; see that he
be safe, and close there, as you will answer it with your life; -- I shall not
trust you in the Army now Sir


Pray Sir re-call this severe command, my Brother has no danger in him, you saw
he did not avoid death, when your hand offered it


Antenor, I will be obeyed; -- by Heaven he dies that dares dispute my Will.


If I go to Prison? Selindra dies, there is none can help her,


You of the Guard seize on him.


Against Imprisonment, I shall endeavor what I can; command my death Sir, and
I will welcome it


Kill him; -- Kill the Traitor; -- dares none stir to do it? Is my breath
grown so weak? I Will try my own strength then


Oh, my Brother's slain! how cruel, and unnatural a deed is this?


The Surgeons say the Chief prisoner will not Live till Morning; I beg Sir,
that the sentence may pass on the rest


'Twas well the Emperors age did not permit his force to act his will, the
wound has not past the bone Madam, it is but a slight cut in the flesh


It Is time that you hasten to the Army, for while Cecropius holds his power,
you cannot be safe here


He advises well Brother, until my Father be dispossessed of this evil spirit
that reigns in him, I wish you away too


I think it must be so; the Soldiers I hope have not forgot their love to me;
-- My Dear Sister, pray will you ore-take my Father lest in this sit he slay
all our Friends; say that Selindra did sly willingly with Cleonel, and that she
regards not my Love, say any thing to gain a little time, until I may do
something to relieve them


I shall do my best: --


What means my Father by this dumb show?


Where are we now Tenedor?


Truly Sir, I know not, but I see Friends here.


Who are they?


Those that brought you in, were the Emperor, and Cecropius; you know Prince
Philocles, that whispers with Selindra, that other sure is the Princess
Ordella


Is that the Princess Ordella?


Your presence Madam gives me strength, and your kind looks, give life unto my
drooping spirits


How miserable am I Sir, that am the occasion of all these evils.


Your own sufferings are the only evils to be lamented, I could curse my
self, that brings such troubles on you; -- but Madam we forget to comfort this
Gallant man, by whose Sword we enjoy our Lives: -- Sir, can you pardon me that
undertook so much, and can so little serve you


It was an injury Sir, to think I would receive my life, ransomed by your death.


By my wound Pollidor, I have appeased my Fathers Rage; by thy wounds Selindra
Lives, and through all these Clouds, I see the Tempest ceasing; -- cannot
Selindra speak to him


I have a heart as full of Gratitude as yours Sir, but not yet any means to
show it; I shall make it my business to serve him


Has my Dear Sister no complement for Pollidor? by whose valor she enjoyes
Selindra, and me


Yes Philocles, I am studying how to express it, for you two have left
nothing for me to say: Sir, I can only thank you over again for my Brothers,
and my Friends preservation, by which you have obliged me, and the whole
Empire, and do deserve some public Honor, and high Recompense


What honor, or what recompense can outweigh this you now heap on me? Madam,
if what I have done, be a service that you will own, I have no wish beyond it;
I shall ever on this day keep a solemn Feast unto the Gods, that did direct my
course that way, and gave me power to become as happy here, as in Elysium


Let those Lodgings next to mime, be made ready for Pollidor, I will not trust
him farther from me; -- Antillacus, go you with as little noise as may be to
the Army, and let the Soldiers know, that I will suddenly be with them; some
lead out Pollidor


'Twas not revenge, for Cleonel, made me press your Majesty to do Justice on
his Murderers, but to cut off Selindra, by which Philocles might have no
hindrance to gain Astella; -- But Sir, since you have freed the Prisoners, and
are content, the Prince shall marry Selindra, I have done; if you Sir, can lay
by all thoughts of Astella; and that Crown, I shall soon forget a private loss


I must laugh Cecropius to see how thou art abused by my feigned show of
kindness, which I only did, to heal the wound I gave; had I another Son, by
whom I might gain Hungary, Philocles had found my Force, answerable to my
Anger; but I confess I did relent, upon a sudden thought, which made me
strike so feebly at him, for now to loose Philocles, were to throw Hungary
away, and to destroy Selindra, were by another kind of stroke to destroy
Philocles


What other way have you Sir? that I cannot yet fancy.


A sure one Cecropius, away that cannot fail, I will give loose reins to my
Sons Love, let him run on, and Joy in his beloved Selindra, whose sweets once
had, and his young appetite allayed, (as most violent passions soonest are)
then 'twill be best to take away Selindra by a Poison; then it may be done
without suspicion, while I urge on the Marriage, join in all the Nuptial
Jollities, and put on such pleasing looks, as shall make thee doubt my purpose,
though thou know my heart


I see not yet how this can get Astella, or that Crown.


Thou art grown so dull of late, that thou see nothing; while this joy lasts,
Astella may be found, and then Selindra dying, what can hinder Philocles from
getting Astella


I do submit Sir, and must applaud your purpose, it is a design I do confess,
much above my reach, and the first mischief I have come short in.


You look cheerfully to day Pollidor, we may hope to see you abroad shortly.


I believe I might venture now Sir, though my Surgeons be not of my mind; but
Sir, how do you find the good old Emperor disposed


I like not my Fathers smiles Pollidor, his sudden starts into such extremes,
make me apprehend more danger in his kindness, then his rage; so that to
prevent all further evils, I have a purpose to repair unto the Army; and it is
Ordella's wish, as well as mine, that Selindra would trust her self with me
there


That may secure you both, but will not Selindra's honor suffer?


Now that Selindra's interest, and his are become one, I see no reason she
should fear to go, nor indeed any scruple why their Marriage may not be
privately, and presently dispatched, for while the business lingers thus, they
give hopes to such Endeavors as would divert it, and do run daily hazzards,
by staying here


Ordella argues what my soul wishes, but Selindra's looks do not consent to
make me so soon happy


Sir, my loooks do be-lye my heart, if they show ought that would delay a
happiness to you, for I have none beyond yours: -- But Sir, above all other
reasons, Pollidor (not being yet able to attend you) if he be left behind, will
hardly escape Cecropius's fury


Most true Selindra, he will be in danger, I shall therefore attend his
recovery; without him I will not move; nor will I put a thought in act without
thy Council


You have both said well, but in my judgment, this is no fit time for such
Complements, when your lives are daily sought


If you be resolved to attend my recovery, I shall propose a sudden fancy of
mine, to that purpose, which may secure us


Speak it Pollidor.


Suppose Selindra do ask the Princess leave to return to Cyprus, and give out
that she only expects, her Fathers coming to convey her thither. -- Sir, you
may court Selindra publicly while she stays, and she seem to neglect your
love, and put on a show of kindness unto me, as in gratitude for my hazzards
in her redemption, I will also counterfeit affection to Selindra, and give out,
that I am of better quality then I seem: This Sir, if well managed, will be
ground enough, to deceive their best Spies, and for some time secure us all


I approve your thought Pollidor, and if Selindra can undertake her part, doubt
not me, I Will put on such a seeming jealousy, as shall puzzle the old Fox
Cecropius himself


I shall easily observe my directions, and soon learn to be civil to a man, I
owe so much to


Come Ordella, while they practice love, we will reconcile us to the Emperor,
and try to bring him on a present visit to Pollidor, before this sit of his
good nature leave him


Selindra we must find you sitting in a more familiar way with Pollidor, then
ordinary conversation does allow


I shall obey you Madam: -- Now they are gone, we may enjoy our selves, this
happy design of yours, will afford us many hours of freedom


My soul is joyed to look on thee Astella!


And my happiness too great to be expressed by words! that you live! makes this
Earth a Paradise to me; my heart can scarce make room for Philocles, it is so
full of Pollinesso


I am all thine Astella.


Is it time Sir, that you retired to rest, you spend your spirits, by so much
discourse, which does retard your cure


You should neglect no means Sir, for your recovery, lest by a long stay here,
some accident unlooked for, may make you known


I wonder Philocles does not call to mind that he has seen you.


He believes me dead, as all others do; but I shall observe the best rules for
my recovery however: -- Now Astella we have time to hear how you were conveyed
from Belgrade, pray make me know how you came hither


That same night that you departed to the Army, and our first Ambassadors went
toward Greece, to implore Lascares's aid against the Germans, I was by my
Fathers own hand delivered unto Periander, whom I was to call Father; and by
him was brought to Ciprus, where the Plague then raging, he transports me with
his Family to this Town


How came you into the Court then?


On the first Feast Day, I went with Periander to the Temple, that I might see
the Emperor, and the Printess Ordella, where the Princess casting her Eyes on
me, found mine so fixed on her, that I could not remove them, but blushed, and
still looked on her; by what power led, I know not; but she took a fancy to
have me live with her, which Periander durst show no dislike to: thus was I, to
my great joy, called to Court, where I became a Companion to the Princess:
within a short time Cleonel had affection for me, which did not free me from
old Cecropius dotage: of which, with Prince Philocles his worthy love, you
shall know hereafter, for I have now held you too long from your repose


Dearest Astella thy words are balsome to my wounds.


Your Majesty will not think this honor too much for Pollidor, when you shall
know he is of better quality then he seems; -- ha! what do I see?


That which should teach thee to have nobler thoughts Philloces, think on this
surprise


How they are disturbed!


They do it rarely well.


Sir, I am now come to excuse the imprisonment you had, and to give you thanks
for my sons life; I shall now endeavor to recompense your merit, rather then
trouble you with words


Great Sir, this honor, with the many other favors I received, do shame me to
think that you allow me a merit I cannot own, but if the Gods do give me life,
my only business shall be to seek occasions to serve you and yours


I shall contribute what I can to your health, and will please my self, with
the expectation of great things from you


Sir, you oblige me beyond words, to utter my sense of your favors.


My purpose is to give you a kind welcome, and a respect suitable to your
worth, and quality: -- fair Maid, I know not well how Ciprus, I shall lay my
commands on Ordella, to deny you her consent to go


Sir, The favors and honors I have received here, are far beyond the ills
you mention; and my happiness such, in the Princess Ordella's love, that I
lament the thoughts of my departure, but when I consider the mischiefs past,
and foresee worse like to follow, 'twere madness not to fly them; when my
Father is returned, I shall renew my suit, to have the Princess leave, to leave
this place, and until then, make it my care, to tend this hurt man, my
redeemer! to whom I owe my life and honor


Selindra, if I can add any thing unto thy happiness, I shall do it gladly,
for thou art something more, then ever I have found in Woman.


What thanks do we owe Pollidor for this disguise! it takes Ordella, beyond our
hopes; did you observe how my Father eyed us, while he talked to Pollidor


Yes, and do believe Cecropius and he are gone to compare their notes, for that
Fox was very vigilant


Selindra, let us enjoy this blessed minute.


Sir, While the two Lovers whisper, pray oblige me with the knowledge of the
occasion of your coming into these parts, by which we have received so great an
obligation; and if you please? to pass this time with the relation of your own
story, unless with your self, you would conceal it


Madam, My story is not worthy your ears, nor my self this honor: -- yet I
have a story, -- such as will make me blush to utter, though no crime do belong
to it: -- nor am I what I seem, and yet not fit to appear other, -- but Madam,
your commands are too high honors to be neglected, my own resolutions shall
give way, and my nearest concerns submit to your will


I perceive you are disturbed at my curiosity to know, what I believe you would
conceal; it may be you have vowed not to discover; truly Sir, for want of what
to say, I only said it


Madam, I was surpised by your approach, which made my tongue appear less
ready then my heart to obey you; your commands, Madam, are sufficient to
dissolve any vows of mine, and since you will vouchsafe to hear, I shall
relate


How are you Sir? Methinks your Eyes do show some anguish in your wounds, do we
not trouble you


We have done ill to stay thus long, Selindra it is your fault, you should have
directed better


No Madam, my hour to rest is not so precisely to be kept, nor have I any
pains upon me, as the Prince thinks; my wounds heal the faster for your company


You are civil Sir.


Madam, the Prince's kindness, and his care, is not at this time necessary: --
pray Sir, if your occasions call you not, do not go yet


Pollidor we know your civility is great, out discretion must not be the less,
I see you are disturbed, and know your pains are great upon you; make no reply,
we will soon visit you again; come Ordella, let us leave Selindra to her charge;
good rest unto my friend, all joys unto my Mistress


Beshrew your kindness at this time, -- how like Tantalus was I?


What mean you by this passion brother? shall I call the Surgeons?


No Selindra, they have no skill in my disease.


You speak, and look, as if you wanted sleep, pray retire to rest.


Rest Selindra! where can I find rest? Philocles has taken all rest from me!
did you not observe how the Princess came to me? and how she threw her favors
on me! when in the height of all my joy, your approach destroyed me


If this be all! I must smile, to hear you sigh brother.


All Selindra! do thou mock me? are thy own flames so weak? thou smilest at
mine


I cannot choose but smile, when I rejoice to see my wishes fall so fast upon
me: you love the Princess, and she will love you, she must, she shall, nay, I
doubt she does already! and have some fear, the work will be too easy, if I
undertake it


Now thou mockest me more, then thou did before! prithee Selindra be serious,
and do not play with what torments me


What can be more serious? then to make a marriage between so great a Princess,
and the King of Hungary? pray where can she make a better choice? or who can
better plead your suit then I? Look to your wounds brother, leave this affair
to me.


My best wishes do attend thee, she has raised in me such doubtful hopes, that
they begin to vanish with her, and such fears to lose what I never had, do
throng so fast upon me, that on the sudden I am orewhelm'd, --

-- With doubts, with joys, with fears, so strangely mixed!
My heart is Hell, until my hopes be fixed.

GOod day unto the bright Selindra?


May your Lordship find many such.


Why do you sly me, Madam? I come in diligence to make known to you, what
concerns you more, then any other business can, toward which you make such
haste from me


I fled not from your Lordship, nor did I perceive, that you had ought to say
to me; what is your pleasure now


My business is, to preserve you from a certain ruin, and to set you above
the reach of mischief, as high in honor, as you are in beauty, and in virtue


I were much unworthy such a favor, and not Mistress of any virtue, if I
should not return a befitting gratitude


Know then Selindra, you are designed unto your grave; your wedding robe, will
prove your winding sheet, if I prevent it not; the Emperor puts on this show of
kindness, only to destroy you with less noise; he does consent that
Philocles by a present marriage, should satisfy his appetite; after which you
shall be poisoned, that the Prince may have no object between him and Astella:
This by all our Grecian Gods is true, and this I have consented to


Can there be such a wickedness amongst men!


Can you doubt it, that have seen so much? or can you think Lascares will
consider such a life as yours, when it does interpose between the Crown of
Hungary and him


If this be so, how can I avoid it? shall I think you will betray the Emperors
trust, to oblige me


Madam, if you would please to look on your faithful servant with equal Eyes,
and on your dangers with judicious thoughts, you will see that Philocles his love
brings death; -- and Pollidor methinks, should not have gained an interest
where Philocles pretends


My Lord, I must confess what you have said, is worthy my most serious
thoughts, -- but my Lord, it is not fit that I treat farther in this affair,
until my Father does return; if you please to move him in it, my obedience
shall follow his will


Of his consent I make no doubt, my best Mistress; joys, and greatness do
attend Selindra when she smiles on me


But how can you secure your self, and me from Philocles? will not his rage,
raise a revenge as ruinous, as this you would have me fly from


Good Madam, let not so mean a thought remain with you; I have Lascares Scepter
in my hand, and all the Frontier Towns in my Command; the Soldiers too, since
Philocles forsook them, are become mine; if my fair Mistress would by one kind
look confirm my joys, it would encourage me to let her see, at what a rate I
value her


I blush to think that I have smiled so much, upon so short acquaintance, Pray
Heaven you have not a design, to destroy me this way


Can you think I will destroy my souls only joy? to remove all such fears, I
will now put my life into your hands


How my Lord! your life?


You have heard, Madam, how the Hungarian Army marches toward Grecce, it does
so: drawn in by me, to my aid they come, to assist me to get Selindra, and to
set Lascares Crown upon her head! if she will deserve it? -- we are interrupted
now, -- think on me, and thou shall wear this Imperial Crown, Selindra, within
few hours


What has caused thy clouded brow Selindra? has that viper vexed thee?


He has frighted me, and will anger us all, if he be not prevented; such horrid
mischiefs he has in love to me revealed, as I shake to think on


To what tune run they?


To several tunes, some to Love, some to private bloodshed, others to public
War, and in sum to ruin all that is good; -- The Emperor will permit our
marriage Sir, and after poison me, that you may have leisure to gain Astella;
but above all, Cecropius treachery must be looked to; He has called in the
Hungarian Army, to make me his by force: he talked of a Crown too, that I
should wear, if I would comply with him, and at that word you interrupted us:
good Sir, make it a little more your business to prevent these Devils, and
their designs


There is danger in this, worthy our best care, Selindra, I see our stay here,
will still occasion new designs on us


And you too late, I fear, will find my counsel good, why may not I have credit
to protect Pollidor in your absence


I think you may, but yet it is not fit to hazard such a friend, to the fury of
that Monster Cecropius; besides, Selindra is now engaged in honor, to stay for
him


Truly Sir, I think I am in honor bound, not rashly to throw away a man, that
has preserved us both; but Sir, when you shall consider that his wounds do now
permit him to walk abroad, a few days more, will get him strength to ride with
us: during which time, I can secure all by dissembling a little kindness to
Cecropius, by which, I shall also discover his treaty with the Hungarians


Pollidor is much obliged to you Selindra, I like well this noble humor in you.


It does become her, my dear Sister, it shall be my care to look after
Cecropius now, and if necessity require, I will remove him speedily; I must
leave you for some hours Ordella, to attend my Father; Farewell, my bright
Mistress; pray let your care continue unto Pollidor, and let not fall your
kindness to Cecropius, he may confess to you, what no tortures can draw from
him.


It does concern me Sir.


It does indeed, Selindra, thy gratitude to Pollidor, looks hansomely; methinks
as he recovers health, he grows comely, he seems to me, as if he were above
the ordinary rank of men, I dare say he has a Noble Soul


Madam, you judge right, did you converse as I do daily with him, you should
wonder at such worth; methinks I see greatness in his looks, and do observe
that he holds in that luster, with more advantage, then others show it forth


He is sure some great Prince disguised, Selindra! and a happy man he is, that
has found one that can discover his concealed perfections to the life


Madam, my Master is now awake, and begs the favor of a visit.


I shall follow your Lordship, when I have brought the Princess to her Chamber.


Is he a Lord too, Selindra?


Did I call him Lord, Madam?


Ask when you see him next, go Selindra; this Ceremony to me is needless, I
shall find the way alone; it is fitter that you attend your charge, Pollidors
wounds will not heal out of thy fight, Selindra: -- I cannot choose but wonder
what kind of entertainment you can find, for so many hours, with so great a
stranger, as Pollidor


Sure she is jealous, and I have been too free in praising him; -- Pollidor and
I, do spend more hours discoursing of Ordella's beauties, then of all other
matters; he admires your perfections, Madam; his other wounds are slight,
compared with those, he received from your eyes: for --


Hold, Selindra, I delight not in such saucy thoughts from Pollidor, nor does
it become you to hear, much less to relate them unto me: I do fear Selindra,
you hope by this invention, to dazzle my Eyes, that I may not discover your own
affection to this Pollidor; take heed you fall not from that virtue you are
valued for, if you do deceive my trust, or Philocles his love! you will be
neither worthy his anger, nor my pity


Let me fall under the weight of both your angers, when I deserve ill from
either of you, your jealousy afflicts me Madam


I hear my Brother coming, retire, that he may not see thy tears, and meet me
in the Garden after supper, then I will hear more of this, and till then,
suspend my Jndgment of thee


Why went Selindra weeping out? and what troubles you my Dear Sister?


I am not troubl^d now Sir: pray how did you find my Father? in what temper is
he


Well Ordella, all is safe yet; but I cannot be satisfied until you tell me
why Selindra weeps; -- your silence will beget doubts more troublesome, then
the knowledge can be


'Twas nothing but an Argument that fell between us.


That Argument Ordella, if thou love my peace, that Argument!


I may wrong Selindra by it, and trouble you without a cause, when I am
certainly informed, you shall be so, till then, pray do not urge me farther


I am so weak a man in thy esteem, thou dare not trust me with my self;
Ordella, thy discourse will disturb me much, unless thou let me know the
whole matter


My unwillingnesse to tell you, is now become the only cause I fear to do it,
for I was questioning Selindra only, about her frequent visits to Pollidor,
which it seems I put into such Language, as made her weep; this on my credit is
the truth, are you now satisfied


I am satisfied that we have the same thoughts, your judgment on this matter,
confirms my Observations, which till now, took no hold on me; -- If she prove
false, thus I can blow her off; -- But Pollidor, shall pay dear for his
Treachery


Madam, it is fit that I visit you before the Temple, and pay my first vows at
your shrine, offering up a Life devoted to your Service


You owe your health Sir, next to the Gods, unto Selindra's care, such a
gratitude I have not seen before, nor such a zeal as hers, to serve you


My obligations to Selindra, I must rank after the Honors I have received from
you Madam: -- Pray Sir, how does the Emperor, Cecropius, take this fained love
between Selindra and me? how does it work with them


Since Selindra dwelt with you, the whole Court believes it is a mutual Love;
only my Sister and my self, have other thoughts


(Those last words came coldly out, I must remove this jealousy;) I am glad
Sir that you are secured by it, and I am joy'd to have a hand in any thing,
that shall conduce to serve you, I do profess my Medicines have not so much
wrought my cure, as the joy I have to see such unparalleld Virtues, and
Affections meet, as is yours, and the good Selindra's; day day she tires her
tongue in praising Philocles, and stiil grows fresh, by talking of you Sir; I
cannot wish you greater happiness on Earth, then you will have with her, may
it last while you last, and may Eternal Curses light on those that wish it
less


I thank you Sir, and will hope to prosper, as you pray for me, and next to
Selindra, and my Sister, place you by my heart


You Honor me too much, and will make me proud, I must take my leave Sir, my
strength is not yet enough confirmed, to stay long abroad.


The Gods go with thee, thou Man of Honor.


What think you Brother of this Complement?


I think him really, what he seems.


I wish I could do so too, but when I call to mind that Selindra unto me, did
talk just thus of Pollidor, as he now discoursed to you of her, methinks it
looks like a design


Does Pollidor presume to pretend to you?


So Selindra would have me think, which indeed was the main cause of my anger,
and her Tears


I am not willing to be jealous, nor yet so fond, as not to be sensible, when
there is just cause; Ordella let us smooth our brows, and observe them
farther, such a guilt cannot be long hid, and until we be confirmed by some
better proof, it is unworthy in us to suspect them, on our surmises only, since
what they do, is by our direction


It Is not my nature to judge ill of any, and I hope Selindra will deserve
better; I am converted, and now we are thus secure, why may not you go to the
Army, and leave Selindra with me; Pollidor in your absence, may Court her in
public, which will confirm my Father in his mistake, when he sees me dislike
it


I like it well Ordella: what will you do this Evening?


I have some business for a while; Selindra after supper, will meet me in the
Garden, pray come to us there


Bid your Boy attend us with his Lute then, it may so happen that I must take
leave this night, for I hear that the Hungarian Army comes on apace


The Emperor sends you word Sir, that Cecropius has delivered all the Frontier
Towns to the Hungarians, and himself advances in the head of that Army toward
us


Dispatch a Post unto Antillacus, bid him advance toward the Traitor, I will
this night set forth, and by day break shall reach him


Sir, Antillacus retreats before the Enemy, his men fewer in Number, are so
disheartened by Cecropius's revolt, they dare not look on the Hungarians


Let the Page call Pollidor, to my Sisters Chamber presently, we will take
leave there, and depart immediately; Come Ordella, this is somewhat quicker work
then I expected; bid my servants make what have they can, to meet me here at my
return


My Lord, since you went hence, the Court has been in daily Tumults about
Philocles his Love unto your Daughter


Is Selindra so much in favor with the Gods, as to be looked on by Prince
Philocles


The Prince seeks no other Heaven but her, and as the World thinks she neglects
him, and Loves one Pollidor


Madam, I cannot raise my Faith to what you say, nor can I joy in such a
blessing, until I know the Emperor does approve it; pray Madam, where may I
find Selindra


She is now with the Princess in the Garden, I shall let her know your Lordship
is returned


You obliege me Madam; -- though I have been long absent, I have not been Idle,
nor could I well have made more haste hither, cousidering how many great
Affairs I have dispatched, since I went hence


Oh Sir! you are welcome, I have with some trouble, and some fear expected your
Return


Madam, I stayed the longer, by reason of those Tumults I found at Belgrade, a
false Astella was set up by Euticus, and his faction, but so soon as I made
known, that you lived, both sides laid down their Arguments, though not their
Arms, which I advised as the best means to bring you home in safety


But why does our Army enter Greece.


That Is the riddle Madam, the old Fox Cecropius gave notice to the Hungarians,
that the Emperor purposed in his own person to invade them, since Philocles
had refused it, and would by a conquest join that Crown to his Empire; he
insinuates also, that if the Hungarians would assist him in his design, he
would make the Emperor unable to harm them, by delivering up all the Frontier
Towns into their hands


And what is his design?


Only by their power, to force the Emperor to deliver you, and one Pollidor up
to him: This I persuaded Orsanes, and the rest to hearken too, and my long stay
was to see the Towns delivered to Orsanes, which is done, and Cecropius fooll'd
by his vain hopes, Marches in the head of your Army, which comes on apace,
only to receive your Commands Madam


The Gods reward you, for I never can; -- but here is News Periander, beyond
what you tell; Pollinesso Lives, lives here under the name of Pollidor; and see
where he comes; -- Oh! my Brother we Periander, who has so much obliged me


I hope I shall live to thank you Sir.


Sir, I am rewarded in the good I have done, if my services do prove such in
your esteem


My Brother, you must dispatch Periander back unto the Army, to give Orsanes
and the rest, notice that you live; -- Cecropius has rendered all the Towns, and
comes on demanding to have me delivered to his lust


We shall order him at leisure, our care to inform Orsanes, must indeed be
speedy; -- Periander, though I cannot command, I may entreat you that know our
Affairs, to return unto Orsanes, and give him notice, that I intend this
night, to set forth with Philocles, and will come over to him, with my first
opportunity; bid him march fairly through the Country, and take heed that
Antillacus engage him not to fight, till I Arrive; if you ride hard; you may be
back with us, before we part from hence, for I hear Cecropius is not far off


By my speed Sir, judge my Zeal to serve you.


As you pass by my Lodgings, pray send all my servants to attend me in the
next Room, from hence we shall take Horse this Evening; -- Now Astella,
methinks the Gods do smile on Hungary, and Ordella would be gracious!
Pollinesso were most happy; How does my Love prosper, Astella


I can make no certain Judgment on it yet.


Can thou not procure me one smile before we part?


'Twill not be possible, if you depart this night; I could wish we had more
time, because I now propose some pleasure in my woeing for you; methinks the
storms that I have raised, look merrily, now the calm is certain, and so nigh,
I have so light a heart, that I could play with dangers, if any were within my
reach.


Let me Embrace and Kiss thee, my Dear, Dear Selindra; thou art so great a Joy
unto my Soul, that I lament to part one minute from thee; when we meet next, we
shall Embrace more freely.


That you must go from me, grieves me; must you needs go with Philocles? may
you not stay one day longer with me


I dare not, do not weep thus, thy Tears will prove ill Omens, and I become a
superstitious fool, to fear I know not why


How can I choose but lament to part with, what is dearer to me then my life;
pray do not go this night, bestow this night on me


I swear thou make me sad, prithee speak more cheerfully, and dry thy Eyes,
least Philocles perceive thy Tears, and Ordella do discover us, and so unmask
us both, before we be prepared


No matter for their jealousy, are not we above the reach of malice now?


Not yet Selindra, we may be ere-long, till then, it is not good to provoke any,
it is by your advice to, that we should be still disguised


Yes, and it is my opinion still; but when Philocles is gone who can discover
us


The Gods, who will not suffer such impiety to be longer hid, let me loose
Ordella, and I will cut these twisted Monsters into Atoms that their united
Souls, may so expire together


Why thus enraged Sir?


Can thou ask false man? we have heard and seen, all that has past between ye.


It may be so, and yet be mistaken, in all you have heard, and seen too; --
Sir, if you will have a little patience, you shall see your mistake, and be
sorry for this injurious Language, when you know to whom you speak


Good Madam, persuade the Prince to hear us, and there will be no cause to
fight


Thou worst of Women, how dares thy lips move toward me?


For Heavens sake Madam hear us, you will too late repent this rashness else;
we are both as innocent, as you can wish


Brother you may do well to hear them, and revenge at leisure; pray lay by this
anger for a while, and take it up again, when you see cause; they are in your
power to punish, as you please


I thank thee Ordella, they are so; -- I am tame, and now you may say on.


Sir, if you have heard; and seen what past between us, I do confess you have
reason for your anger, and our fondness does deserve blame, but not death;
it is true, that we have negligently showed, what we might better have
concealed; necessity therefore now compells us to discover what we yet meant
not to do, that our Innocence may no longer suffer


Your Innocence!


Madam, the Prince his absence, gives me opportunity to beg your pardon for
Selindra, and my self, who have too long hid our affections from you, and our
selves also; for she is my Sister, and will ere long, appear worthy Philocles
his best thoughts, and I do hope my self, when I shall dare to be my self, may
have leave to say, my life is vowed to serve you


Sir, you are mistaken, I am not to be deceved by this slight trick; -- you
would gain time to escape my brothers vengeance


No Madam, you will shortly see, I am above it; and if --


Seize on that Traitor.


Tenedor, Periander, Tecknor, Treason; -- what means this madness Philocles?
a reasonable man should hear another speak; if I do not satisfy all your
doubts, you shall find that I dare meet your fury; and shall raise storms as
high, as you can wish to see


Pray unfold this mystery, I do attend you.


Let this pledge speak for us both, for I can have no other interest, then to
give her up into your Arms Sir, send your Guards off, and this riddle shall be
as easy, and as pleasant, as it now looks harsh, Philocles will blush, when
he shall know from whom he slyes, and by whose hand offered to him


I understand you not, nor do I care; -- hark, what noise is this?


What Is this? a War within his own Walls; Philocles is this a time for
private brawls? when the Hungarians are at your Gates


I am ready to depart Sir; and shall send them back, much faster then they now
come on; I beg your pardon Sir, for my neglect


What News brings Gillon?


Antillacus sends you word Sir, that you must prepare to receive him with the
Army, under the Town Walls, his soldiers have so many pannick fears, he dares
not lead them out, to face the Enemy, he also wishes that Prince Philocles
would draw out the Court Regiments, to hearten his dejected men


I think 'twere better to receive them within the Walls, until their shame, do
outface their fears; Tell Antillacus, my old Arms are on, and that I will my
self strike the Traitor in the face


Have back good Gillon, and tell Antillacus; if he can defend his Camp till I
Arrive, I wish him not to move this way; my looks will send those ungrateful
people home, if not, I have a flame within me, will consume them all. -- I beg
your pardon Sir, for my neglect


Repair it by your speedy succor, I shall take present order for what the
Town can afford us.


Ordella, I have a War within, that will consume me.


I hope this great Affair will divert your thoughts, and remove your trouble.


For some few days it may; -- farewell my Dear Sister; -- and when I return,
you shall hear from me Sir


I shall not stay behind you Sir, my wounds is not so ill, are to keep me from
waiting on you; when this hurry, and your anger is over, I hope you will be at
leisure to hear me out, and be pleased rather to find you can be mistaken,
then me guilty


I will by no means suffer it, 'twill be no charity, to permit you to hazard
Selindra's interest, by new dangers


Sir, your scorns, shall have no more power to stay me, then your anger has, I
will along


But you shall not; I do suspect you will betray me to your Countrymen, and
dare not trust you with me


All this will not do, I know you do not doubt me that way? and I do swear,
unless you break the bonds of Hospitality, (and do imprison me) I will along


And I will rather do it, then have your company, if you desist not.


Philocles will not so much blemish his great Name! imprison me that saved
your life; -- me, that am vowed to stand, or fall with you; -- Sir, I must
chide you now, you do too long hold up a causeless anger, you know not why;
too long neglect the great Affair that calls you hence; -- I will stay no
longer for you, but go do the work, before you come


Stay Pollidor, thou have confounded all my reason, such a mixture of
Nobleness, never met with such a Treachery till now; though I do know thee
false, and do resolve with my own hand to Kill thee; I will trust thee this
way, and do now entreat thee to stay till to morrow, that my Father comes


I Obey.


Oh! my dear Sister, once more farewell,
I am now fallen from Paradise to Hell.

The Gods go with you, and your action bless,
While I retire, and pray for your success.

We will be gone Selindra, and face Philocles, in the head of our own Army; --
what news Periander


Sir, I am come to fetch you to your Army, I can convey you thither, before you
are mist here


We are ready now, how far off is the Army?


You may hear their Drums Madam, at the City Gates.


Come, let us hasten to our Troops: --
When instruments of War, from War release,
It Is a good Omen, to a happy peace.

Thou art a bold ill man Cecropius, thou art ungrateful to thy Country, and my
trust


Sir, I have but hid my gratitude under this old Armor, which is only now put
on, to obtain what my prayers could not, -- I demand justice Sir, for Cleonels
blood, which you have hitherto denied me, in favor to his Murderers


This fained modesty, is more impudent, then thy Arms are, thou know I was
more eager then thy self, to do justice on those that slew thy Son, and thou
see clearly, our Laws cannot touch them for his fall


Was not Cleonel slain by Pollidor? and was not Selindra accessory? and does
not our Laws condemn such Murderers to Dye


No, thou know they do not, thou know thy Son was by a just hand
punished, and that Pollidor deserves praise and reward


Good Sir, spend no more breath on this vile man, the slave is not worthy your
anger: -- Foolish Hungarians, ungrateful perjured people: -- Orsanes, I did
not look for this from you; -- but my sword shall speak my vengeance.


Prince Philocles has not in Grcece a more faithful servant then Orsanes; Pray
Sir lay by this passion but a few minutes, and you shall see that I have
labored hard, to bring your own desires, to their wished ends: -- and
Cecropius the main Agent in it all


Why do your Actions, and your words so disagree? Orsanes knows our Grecian
hearts cannot be compelled, when we have time to draw our Swords


Great Sir, your actions, have enought declared your worth unto the World, and
to our Nation most; which we shall ever own, though now by some necessity
compelled, we do appear as enemies, in the behalf of this good man, who has
engaged us to deliver up a Lady called Selindra, and one Pollidor, to his
hands, which he by strong arguments assured us, would be for your, and for our
future happiness: this done, we are all at Philocles command


Those two you mention, are of late become unworthy of my thoughts; yet your
engagement was barbarous, to undertake you know not what: sound the charge


Hold Philocles, I have entertained you with discourse thus long, only till I
might hear that shout behind us: -- hark, hark, Sir! Now the time is come, for
us to keep our Oaths made to Cecropius, and to manifest our love to Philocles,
-- make way there for the King


What Riddle's this? what wonders do I see?


Take away that shadow of a King, to present death Orsanes; and now Selindra
you are once more at my dispose: and you Sir, that think you can command the
World! shall find this weak old Arm, can justify my title here


Have I now performed my oath unto the great Cecropius?


You have.


I must then set this Lady free, from the danger of our Swords. --


Long live the King of Hungary.


I am betrayed.


Pollidor! and Selindra! why is he crowned!


They are confederates with Cecropius, on which design they have thus long
lived amongst us


Orsanes, lay that Monster, at his Masters feet; there to receive a Doom worthy
his treachery, and ingratitude


Pollidor, what mean these mysteries?


All respects to Philocles.


How comes Selindra then with thee? and that Crown upon thy head? I tell thee
Pollidor, if Selindra can neglect me, I can contemn her; and not envy thee that
mis-becoming Crown thou wearest, which I will tear from off thy swelling
brows, and trample on it, when it is mine by a second conquest


-- Will Philocles forsake the List? fly from such a foe! send for the
Princess Ordella then, that we may meet on equal terms


You are merry Sir, my gentle temper I see, begets contempt from your great
courage


No Sir, you are mistaken still, I am your servant, and do value Philocles,
more then he can contemn me: -- Orsanes, bring my Standard hither: -- carry
this, and my Crown, unto the Princess Ordella; lay


I understand not what these Riddles mean!


If Philocles be yet at leisure to hear me speak, I shall soon remove this
wonder


If Pollidor prove worthy, I shall not trust my Eyes nor Ears for ever.


But when Prince Philocles shall know that Pollinesso speaks, he will believe
no hand has more right, to deliver up Astella into his Arms, then I: Do you not
know me yet Sir


Nor yet know my self! -- Antillacus, do I wake? or is this a Phantosm that I
think I see?


It Is as strange to me, Sir!


While my Sons wonder lasts, let me embrace you Sir, and obtain both yours,
and Astellas pardon, and chide you both in the same breath; why did you suffer
us to walk so long in this unhappy darkness? and run so many hazzards, which
this light would have avoided


There was no other way to obtain this light, while Cecropius eclipsed your
glory Sir


Does Pollinesso live? can he forget my crimes? and forgive my blindness!


Can Philocles pardon my concealment? by which he was so blinded?


There is but one happiness on earth beyond holding Pollinesso thus!


To me too, there can be only one above it! -- and that is Ordellas leave to
love her: -- but Sir, have you no room for Selindra in your heart?


I dare not look that way: I dare not have a hope so high, as pardon from her.
-- I am so full of guilt, that I dare not live longer to think of my
unworthiness.


What have I done Sir, that you should be thus cruel to me! will you not look
on me


I shall blush to death, if you speak thus again!


Will Philocles turn from me ever?


Yes Madam, as ashamed to look on you; I have a guilt within, that takes my
manhood from me! -- shall I dare to think you can forgive my unworthy jealousy


If you can forgive me that provoked you to it? I can meet you thus.


And I, fall as low as Earth will let me, to receive your pardon.


I am so much amazed at what I see, that I know not which way to turn me!


This way, Ordella, if you will by me, be guided to felicity? -- this is
Pollinesso's wish too, if I mistake not


It Is my ambition Sir, my highest hope on this side Heaven.


And my honor, that Pollinesso has such thoughts for me; but Sir, 'twill ask
some time for me to raise my wishes to such a value of your worth, that we may
meet on equal terms


Pollinesso's merit, and his worth is such, that when he says he Loves; --
it is argument enough to gain the greatest Queen: -- Ordella, the Gods smile
upon us now: -- and you, Sir, I hope concur with Heaven in our Felicities


My prayers and my blessings shall not be wanting: let Pollinesso give sentence
on Cecropius, before we go unto the Temple


Let him live for ever banished from this happy Climate, which he has so long
polluted with his venomous breath


Antillacus see it done.


Madam, can you pardon my disguise?


I cannot well tell what to answer! to find Selindra worthy, is a concern
greater then Astella can be to me; and that you now are Astella, does not more
raise my wonder, then that you were Selindra, does confirm my love, and my
respects to you, Madam


I have a heart too full of joy to keep this distance any longer?


We now loose time, that might be better spent,
In sacrificing for this blessed event!

Lead on then to the Temple, and proclaim
A public feast, in bright Astellas name;
While we do march in a triumphant state,
That all the City may participate
Our joys, now Philocles captivity
Is changed into a triple Victory.


