THE Parsons Wedding, A COMEDY. The Scene LONDON.

WRITTEN AT Basil in Switzerland: BY THOMAS KILLIGREW.

DEDICATED TO THE LADY URSULA BARTU, WIDOW.

LONDON: Printed by J. M. for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the sign of the Blew Anchor, in the lower Walk of the New-Exchange. 1663

No more, I Will sooner be reconciled to want, or sickness, then that Rascal; A
thing, that my Charity made sociable; one, that when I smiled would fawn upon
me, and wag his stearn, like starved Dogs; so nasty, the Company cried foh upon
him; He stunk so of Poverty, Ale, and Bawdry. So poor and despicable, when I
relieved him, he could not avow his calling, for want of a Cassock, but stood
at Corners of Streets, and whispered Gentlemen in the Ear, as they passed, and
so delivered his Wants like a Message which being done, the Rogue vanished, and
would dive at Westminster like a Dabchick, and rise again at Temple-gate; The
ingenuity of the Rascal, his Wit being snuft by want, burnt clear then, and
furnished him with a bawdy Jest or two, to take the Company; But now the Rogue
shall find he has lost a Patron


As I live, if I had thought you would have been in such a fury, you should
never have known it


Treacherous Rogue, he has always rayl'd against thee to me, as a danger his
Friendship ought to give me warning of; and nightly cried, yet look back, and
hunt not, with good Nature and the beauties of thy Youth, that false Woman; But
hear thy Friend, that speaks from sad Experience


Did he say this?


Yes, and swears ye are as unsatiate as the Sea, as Covetous, and as
ungrateful: that you have your Tempest too; and Calmes, more dangerous then it


Was the slave so Eloquent in his malice?


Yes, faith, and urged, you (for your part) were never particular, and seldom
sound


Not sound? Why, he offered to marry me, and swore he thought I was chaste, I
was so particular; and proved it, that consent was full marriage, by the first
Institution, and those that love, and lie together, and tell, have fulfilled
all Ceremonies now


Did he offer to marry thee?


Yes, yes.


If ever then I deserved from thee, or if thou be'st deer to thy self, as thou
have any thing thou hop'st shall be safe or sound about thee, I conjure thee,
take my Counsel; Marry him, to afflict him


Marry him?


If I have any power I shall prevail; thou know he has a fat Benefice, and
leave me to plague him, till he give it me to be rid of thee


Will you not keep me then?


I keep thee? prithee, will thou keep me? I know not why men are such Fools to
pay? We bring as much to the sport, as Women; Keep thee? I Would marry thee as
soon; Why? that is Wedding sin; No, no keeping I, that you are not your own, is
all that prefers you before Wives


I hope this is not real.


Art thou such a stranger to my humor? Why I tell thee, I should hate thee if I
could call thee mine, for I loath all Women within my knowledge, and it is six
to four if I knew thy sign I Would come there no more; A strange Mistress makes
every night anew, and these are your pleasing sins; I had as live be good, as
sin by course


Then I am miserable.


Not so, if you will be instructed, and let me pass like a stranger when you meet
me


But have you these humors?


Yes faith; yet if you will observe them, though you Marry him, I may perchance
be your Friend; But you must be sure to be coy; for to me the hunting is more
pleasure then the Quarry


But if I observe this, will you be my Friend hereafter?


Firm as the day; Hark, I hear him; I knew he would


It Is well, something I Will do.


Open the door, I say, and let me in; your favorite and his Tithes, shall come
no more here


Yes, but he shall; it is not you, nor your braced Drum, shall fright me hence,
who can command the souls of men; I have read Divine Seneca; thou know
nothing but the earthly part, and can cry to that, Faces about


Thou read Seneca? thou steal his Cover, to clothe thee, naked and wicked, That
for money would sell thy share of the Twelve, and art allowed by all that
know thee, fitter to have been Judas, then Judas was for his treachery


Rail, do Rail, my illiterate Captain, that can only abuse by memory; and
should I live thou could read my Sentence, I should never die


No ungrateful, live till I destroy thee; and thankless Wretch, Did all my care
of thee deserve nothing but thy malice, and treacherous speaking darkly still?
with thy fine, No, not he, when any malicious discourse was made of me, and by
thy false faint, No, Faith; Confess, in thy denials, whilst thy smiling Excuses
stood a greater and more dangerous Evidence against me, then my Enemies
Affidavits could have done


I Will lie for never a lean Soldier of you all.


I have, for thee, slave, when I have been wondered at for keeping Company with
such a face; But they were such as know thee not; all which thy looks deceived,
as they did me; They are so simple they would Cousen a Jury, and a Judge that had
Wit would swear thou ly'dst, should thou confess what I know to be true, and
award Bedlam for thee; it is so strange and so new a thing, to find so much
Rogue lodge at the sign of the Fool


Leave this injurious language, or I Will lay off my Cassock, for nothing shall
privilege your Braggers tongue, to abuse me, a Gentleman, and a Soldier
ancienter then thy self


Yes, thou were so; and now I think on it, I Will recount the Cause, which, it
may be, thou have forgot, through the variety of sins; It was a Hue and Cry
that followed thee a Scholar, and found thee a Soldier


Thou lie; thou, and scandal have but one tongue, hers dwells with thy
Cowards teeth


Oh! do you rage? nay, I Will put the cause in Print too, I am but a skirvy Poet,
yet I Will make a Ballad shall tell how like a faithful disciple you followed
your poor Whore, till her Martyrdom in the Suburbs


I Will be revenged for this scandal.


Then shall succeed, thy flight from the University, disguised into Captain
only the outside was worse Buff, and the inside more Atheist, then they
furnished with an Insolent Faith, uncharitable heart, envious, as old Women,
cruel and bloody as Cowards; thus armed at all points, thou went out,
Threatening God, and trembling at men


I Will be revenged, thou poor man of War, I Will be revenged.


And why so bitter? whose house is this? who dares tell this story?


Why sweet? has he not treacherously broke into our Cabinet, and would have
stolen thee thence? By these hilts, I Will hang him; and then I can conclude my
Ballad with, Take warning all Christian People by the same: I will, you lean
Slave; I Will prosecute thee, till thou art fain to hide in a Servitors gown
again, and live upon Crumbs with the Robin Red-breasts that haunt the Hall, your
old Mess-Mates; Do you snarle? I Will do it, I will, and put thee to fight with
the Dogs for the Bones that but smell of meat; those that your hungry Students
have polished with their teeth


If you do this, good Captain, Lieutenant, and Company (for all your Command, I
think, is within your reach) I say, if you dare do this, I shall sing a song of
one that bad stand, and made a Carrier pay a dear Rent for a little ground,
upon his Majesty's highway


How now, Mistress Wanton? What Is this? What Is this?


This? It Is matter for a Jury, I Will swear, and positively, I Will hang thee,
I Will do it, by this hand, let me alone to swear the Jury out of doubt


But you are in Jest, Mistress Wanton, and will confess (I hope) this is no
truth


Yes Sir, as great a truth, as that you are in your unpay'd-for Scarlet; Fool!
did think, I Would quit such a Friend, and his stayed fortune, to rely upon thy
dead pay, and hopes of a second Covenant


His fortune? what is'st? Th'Advowson of Tybourn Deanery?


No, nor Rents brought in by long staff-speeches, that asks Alms with frowns,
till thy looks and speech have laid violent hands upon men's Charity


Let him alone, I Will warrant, he will never be indicted for drawing any thing but
his tongue, against a man


Very good.


Dear Mrs Wanton, you have won my heart, and I shall live to dote upon you for
abusing this impetuous Captain; will you listen to my old suit? will you marry
me, and vex him? say, dare you do it, without more dispute


'Twas a good Question; she that dares marry thee dares do any thing; she may
as safely lie with the great Bell upon her, and his Clapper is less dangerous
then thine


Why, I pray?


What a miserable condition will thou come to? his wife cannot be an honest
Woman; and if thou should turn honest, would it not vex thee to be chaste
and Paxat, a Saint without a Nose? what Calendar will admit thee, by an
incurable slave that is made of Rogues flesh, consider that


Why, that is something yet; Thou have nothing but a few scars, and a little old
Fame to trust to, and that scarce thatches your head


Nay then I see you are base, and this Plot (not Accident,) and now I'doe not
grudge him thee; go together, it is pity to part you, Whore and Parson, as
consonant


As Whore and Captain.


Take her, I Will warrant her a breeder, I Will prophecy she shall lie with thy
whole Congregation, and bring an Heir to thy Parish, one that thou may
enclose the Common by his Title, and recover it by Common Law


That Is more then thy dear Dam could do for thee, thou Son of a thousand
Fathers, all poor Soldiers, Rogues, that ought mischiefs, no Midwives for
their Birth; But I cry thee Mercy, my Patron has an Estate of old Iron by his
side, with the Farm of old Ladies he scrapes a dirty living from


He earn from an old Lady? hang him, he is only wicked in his desires; and for
Adultery he cannot be condemned, though he should have the vanity to betray
himself; God forgive me for belying him so often as I have done; the
weak-chin'd slave hired me once to say, I was with Child by him


This is pretty, Farewell; and may the next Pig thou farrow'st have a promising
face, without the Dads fool or Gallows in it, that all may swear, at first
sight, That Is a Bastard; and it shall go hard but I Will have it called mine; I
have the way, it is but praising thee, and swearing thou art honest before I am
asked: You taught me the trick


Next Levy I Will preach against thee, and tell them what a piece you are; your
Drum and borrowed scarf shall not prevail, nor shall you win with Charms
half-ell-long, (hight ferret Ribband) the youth of our Parish, as you have done


No, lose no time, prithee study and learn to preach, and leave railing against
the Surplice, now thou have preached thy self into Linen; Adieu, Abigal, Adieu,
Heir apparent to Sir Oliver Marre-text; To Church, go, I Will send a Beadle shall
sing your Epithalamium


Adieu, my Captain of a tame band, I Will tell your old Lady how you abused her
breath, and swore you earned your money harder then those that dig in the Mines
for it. Exit Captain. A fart, fill thy sail, Captain of a Gally Foyst. He Is
gone, come sweet, let us to Church immediately, that I may go and take my
Revenge; I Will make him wear thin Breeches


But if you should be such a Man as he says you are, what would my Friends
say, when they hear I have cast my self away


He says? Hang him, lean, mercenary, provant Rogue; I knew his beginning when
he made the stocks lousy, and swarmed so with vermin we were afraid he would
have brought that Curse upon the County; He says? but what is matter what he
says? a Rogue, by Sire and Damm; his Father was a broad fat Peddler, a what do
you lack, Sir, that haunted good houses, and stole more then he bought; His
Damm was a Gypsy, a pilfering canting Sibyll in her youth, and she suffered in
her old age for a Witch; Poor Stromwell, the Rogue was a perpetual Burden to
her, she carried him longer at her back then in her belly; he dwelt there, till
she lost him one night in the great Frost upon our Common, and there he was
found in the morning candid in Ice: a pox of their Charity that thawed him, you
might smell a Rogue then in the bud, he is now run away from his Wise


His Wife?


Yes, his Wife; Why, do you not know he is married according to the Rogues
Liturgy? a Left Handed Bridegroom; I saw him take the Ring from a Tinkers
Dowager


Is this possible?


Yes, most possible, and you shall see how I Will be revenged on him; I will
immediately go seek the Ordinance against Reformadoes


What Ordinance?


Why, they do so swarm about the Town, and are so destructive to Trade and all
Civil Government, that the State has declared, No person shall keep above two
Colonels and four Captains, (of what Trade soever) in his Family; For now the
War is done, Broken breech, Wood-monger, Rag-man, Butcher, and Link-boy,
(Comrades that made up the ragged Regiment in this holy War) think to return
and be admitted to serve out their times again


Your Ordinance will not touch the Captain, for he is a known Soldier.


He a Captain? an Apochryphal Modern one, that went Convoy once to Brainford
with those Troops that conducted the Contribution-Puddings in the late holy
War, when the City ran mad after their Russet Levites, Apron-Rogues, with horn
hands; Hang him, he is but the sign of a Soldier; and I hope to see him hanged
for that Commission, when the King comes to his Place again


You abuse him, now he is gone; But, --


Why? do thou think I fear him? No Wench, I know him too well for a Cowardly
slave, that dares as soon eat his Fox, as draw it in earnest; the slave's noted
to make a Conscience of nothing but fighting


Well, if you be not a good Man, and a kind Husband --


Thou know the Proverb, as happy as the Parsons Wife, during her Husbands
life


SEcret, give me the Glass, and see who knocks.


Niece, what, shut the Door? as I live this Music was meant to you, I know my
Nephews voice


Yes, but you think his friends has more Music in it.


No Faith, I can laugh with him, or so, but he comes no nearer then my lace.


You do well to keep your smock betwixt.


Faith, Wench, so will thou and thou be wise, from him and all of them, and
be ruled by me, we'll abuse all the Sex, till they put a true value upon us


But dare you forbid the traveled Gentlemen, and abuse them and your servant,
and swear, with me, not to marry in a twelve month, though a Lord bait the
hook, and hang out the sign of a Court Cupid, whipped by a Country Widow; then I
believe we may have mirth cheaper then at the price of our selves, and some
sport with the wits that went to lose themselves in France


Come, no dissembling, lest I tell your servant, when he returns, how much
you're taken with the last new fashion


Madam, it is almost Noon, will you not dress your self to day?


She speaks as if we were Boarders; Prithee, Wench, is not the dinner our own,
sure my Cook shall lay by my own Roast till my stomach be up


But there may be Company, and they will say, we take too long time to trim.
Secret. Give me the flowers my servant sent me, he swear 'twas the first the
Wench made of the kind


But when he shall hear you had Music sent you to day, 'twill make him appear
in his old clothes


Marry, I would he would take exception, he should not want ill usage to rid me
of his trouble; as I live, custom has made me so acquainted with him, that I
now begin to think him not so displeasing, as at first; and if he fall not out
with me, I must with him, to secure my self. Sure (Aunt) he must find Sense and
Reason absent, for when a Question knocks at his head, the Answer tells that
there is no body at home; I asked him, the other day, if he did not find a
blemish in his understanding, and he swear a great Oath, Not he; I told him
'twas very strange, for Fool was so visible an eyesore, that neither Birth nor
Fortune eould reconcile to me


Faith, methinks his humor is good, and his purse will buy good company, and I
can laugh and be merry with him sometimes


Why, pray, Aunt, take him to your self, and see how merry we will be; I can
laugh at any bodies Fool, but mine own


By my troth, but that I have married one Fool already, you should not have
him. Consider, he asks no portion, and yet will make a great jointure; a Fool
with these conveniences, a kind loving Fool, and one that you may govern, makes
no ill husband; Niece, there are other Arguments too, to bid a Fool welcome,
which you will find without teaching; think of it, Niece; you may lay out your
affection to purchase some dear wit, or judgment of the City, and repent, at
leisure a good bargain, in this Fool


Faith, Aunt, Fools are cheap in the Butchery, and dear in the Kitchen; they
are such unsavory infipid things that there goes more charge to the sauce then
the Fool is worth, ere a woman can confidently serve him, either to her bed or
board; then if he be a loving Fool, he troubles all the world a days, and me
all night


Friendship-love, Madam, has a remedy for that.


See if the air of this place has not inclined Secret to be a Baud already. No,
Secret, you get no Gowns that way, Upon my word; if I marry, it shall be a
Gentleman that has wit and honor, though he has nothing but a sword by his
side; such a one naked is better then a Fool with all his Trappings, Bells and
Baubles


Why, as I live, he is a handsome fellow, and merry; mine is such a sad soul,
and tells me stories of Lovers that died in despair, and of the lamentable end
of their Mistresses (according to the Ballad) and thinks to win me by Example


Faith mine talks of nothing but how long he has loved me; and those that know
me not, think I am old, and still finds new causes, (as he calls them) for his
love; I asked him the other day if I changed so fast or no


But what think thou, Secret; my Nephew dances well, and has a handsome
house in the Piazza


Your Nephew? not I, As I live; he looks as if he would be wooed; I Will warrant
you, he will never begin with a woman till he has lost the opinion of himself; But
since you are so courteous, I Will speak to his friend, and let him know how you
suffer for him


Him! marry God bless all good women from him; why, he talks as if the
Dairy-maid and all her Cows could not serve his turn; then they wear such
baudy-breeches, 'twould startle an honest woman to come in their company, for
fear they should break, and put her to count from the fall of them; for I Will
warrant, the year of the Lord would sooner out of her head then such a sight


I am not such an enemy now to his humor as to your Nephews, he rails against
our sex, and thinks by beating down the price of women to make us despair of
Merchants; But if I had his heart strings tied on a True-lovers-knot, I would
so firk him till he found physic in a Rope


He Is a scurvey tongued fellow, I Am sure of that; and if I could have got a
staff, I had marked him


What did he do to thee, Secret?


Why, he swore, he had a better opinion of her then to think she had her
Maidenhead; but if she were that Fool, and had preserved the toy, he swore he
would not take the pains of fetching it, to have it; I confess, I would fain be
revenged on them, because they are so blown up with opinion of their wit


As I live, my Nephew travels still; the sober honest Ned Wild will not be at
home this month


What say you? will you abuse them and all the rest, and stand to my first
Proposition


Yes, faith, if it be but to bury my servant, Sadd; for he cannot last above
another Fall, and how, think you, will your servant take it


Mine! oh God help me, mine is a healthy Fool, I would he were subject to pine
and take things unkindly; there were some hope to be rid of him; for I Will
undertake to use him as ill as any body


As I live, I am easily resolved; for if I would marry, I know neither who nor
what humor to choose


By my troth, Madam, you are hard to please; else the Courtier might have
served turn


Serve turn! Prithee what haste, Secret? that I should put my self to bed with
one I might make a shift with; when I marry, thou shall cry, I, marry, Madam;
this is a husband without blushing wench, and none of your so-so husbands; yet
he might half overcome my aversion, I confess


Overcome! I think so, he might have won a City his way; for when he saw you
were resolved he should not eat with you, he would set himself down as if he
meant to besiege us, and had vowed never to rise till he had taken us in; and
because our sex forbad force, he meant to do it by famine; yet you may stay,
and miss a better market; for hang me, I am of Secrets opinion; he had but two
faults, a handsome fellow, and too soon denied


It Is true, he was a handsome fellow, and a civil, that I shall report him; for
as soon as it was given him to understand; I desired he would come no more, I
never saw him since, but by chance


Why did you forbid him?


There were diverse exceptions; But that which angered me then, was, he came with
the Kings Letters Patents, as if he had been to take up a wife for his
Majesty's use


Alas! was that all? why, it is their way at Court, a common course among them,
and was it not one the King had a great care of? when my mother was alive, I
had such a packet from the Court directed unto me, I bid them pay the Post, and
make the fellow drink, which he took as ill as I could wish, and has been ever
since such a friendly enemy


Nay, as I live, she was for the Captain too; his Scarf and Feather won her
heart


Truly, Madam, never flatter your self; for the Gentleman did not like you so
well as to put you to the trouble of saying, no


Lord, how I hated and dreaded that Scarf and Buffc^at?


Why, Mistress Pleasant, a Captain is an honorable Charge.


Prithee, Secret, name them no more, Colonel and Captain, Commissioner,
Free-quarters, Ordance and Contribution; When Buff utters these words, I
tremble and dread the sound; it frights me still when I do but think on them;
Cuds body, they 're twigs of the old Rod (Wench) that whipped us so lately


I, I, and they were happy days, Wench, when the Captain was a lean, poor,
humble thing, and the Soldier tame, and durst not come within the City, for
fear of a Constable and a Whipping-post; they know the penal Statutes give no
Quarter; Then Buff was out of countenance, and sculk'd from Alehouse to
Alehouse, and the City had no Militia but the Sheriffs-men; In those merry
days, a Bailiff trod the streets with terror, when all the Chains in the City
were rusty, but Mr. Sheriffs, when the people knew no evil but the Constable
and his Watch; Now every Committee has as much power, and as little manners,
and examines with as much ignorance, impertinence and authority, as a Constable
in the Kings key


See, who is that so loud?


The men you talked of, newly come to Town. --


Remember our covenants, get them that can, all friends; and be sure to
dispatch the Plot, to carry them into the Country, lest the brace of new-come
Monsieurs get them


Those flesh-flies? I Will warrant thee from them, yet 'twas foolishly done of me
to put on this gravity; I shall break out, and return to my self if you put me
to a winters wooing


A little patience does it; and I am content to suffer any thing till they are
out of Town: Secret says, they think my pale face proceeds from my love


Does she? that shall be one hint to advance your designs, and my revenge; for
so she be cozened I care not who does it, for scorning me, who (by this hand)
loved her parlously


Sir, what shall I do with the horses?


Carry them to Brumsteds.


What shall I do with your worships.


Mine? take him, hamstring him, kill him, any thing to make him away, lest
having such a convenience I be betrayed to another journey into the Country.
Gentlemen, you are all welcome to my Country House; Charing Cross, I am glad to
see thee, with all my heart


What? not reconciled to the Country yet?


He was not long enough there to see the pleasure of it.


Pleasure? what is it called? walking or hawking, or shooting at Butts?


You found other pleasures, or else the story of the Meadow is no Gospel.


Yes, a pox upon the necessity. Here I could as soon have taken the Cow, as
such a Milk-maid


The wine and meat's good, and the company.


When, at a Tuesday-meeting the Country comes in to a match at two shillings
Rubbers, where they conclude at dinner what shall be done this Parliament,
railing against the Court and Pope, after the old Elizabeth-way of preaching,
till they are drunk with zeal; and then the old Knight of the Shire from the
boards end, in his Coronation breeches, vies clinches with a silenced Minister,
a Rogue that railed against the Reformation merely to be eased of the trouble
of preaching


Nay, As I live, now you are to blame, and wrong him, the man's a very able man.


You Will be able to say so, one day, upon your wives report; I would he were
gelt, and all that hold his opinion: By this good day, they get more souls then
they save


And what think you of the Knights Son? I hope he is a fine Gentleman, when his
green Suit, and his blew stockings are on; and the welcomest thing ^live to
Mrs. Abigail, but Tib and Tom in the Stock


Who, Mr. Jeoffry? Hobinol the second; By this life, it is a very Veal, and he
licks his Nose like one of them; By his discourse you would guess he had eaten
nothing but Hay; I wonder he does not go on all four too, and hold up his leg
when he stales; he talks of nothing but the stable. The Cobblers Blackbird at
the corner has more discourse; he has not so much as the family-jest, which
these Coridons use to inherit; I posed him in Booker's Prophesies, till he
confessed he had not mastered his Almanac yet


But what was that you whispered to him in the Hall?


Why, the Butler and I, by the intercession of March beer, had newly reconciled
him to his Dads old Cod-piece Corslet, in the Hall; which, when his zeal was
up, he would needs throw down, because it hung upon a Cross


But what think you of my neighbor? I hope her charity takes you.


Yes, and her old Waiting-womans devotion; she sighed in the Pew behind me; A
Dutch Skippe^ belches not so loud, or so sower; my Ladies miserable sinner,
with the white (...) she does so squeeze out her prayers; and so wring out,
Have (...) upon us; I warrant her, she has a waiting-womans sting in her
conscience; she looks like a dirty soul'd Baud


Who is this, my Lady Freedom's woman that he describes?


The same, the Independent Lady, I have promised to send her a Cripple or two
by the next Carrier; her subject husband would needs show me his house one
morning; I never visited such an Hospital, it stunk like Bedlam, and all the
servants were carrying Poultisses, Julips, and Glisters, and several Remedies
for all Diseases, but his; The man sighed to see his Estate crumbling away; I
counseled him either to give or take a ounce of Rats-bane, to cure his mind


She is my Cozen; but he made such a complaint to me, I thought he had married
the Company of Surgeons Hall; for his directions to me for several things for
his Wives use, were fitter for an pothecaries-shop then a Ladies Closet


I advised him to settle no Jointure, but her old Stills, and a Box of
Instruments upon her; she hates a man with all his Limbs; a Wooden-leg, a
Crutch and Fistula in Ano, wins her heart; her Gentleman Usher broke his leg
last Dog Days, merely to have the honor to have her set it, a foul rank Rogue,
and so full of salt humors, that he posed a whole College of old Women with a
Gangrene; which spoiled the jest, and his ambling before my Lady, by applying a
hand-saw to his gartring place; and now the Rogue wears booted Bed-staves, and
destroys all the young ashes to make him legs


I never saw such a nasty affection; she would ha done well in the incurable; a
Handmaid to have waited on the Cripples


She converses with naked men, a^^ handles all their members though never so
ill affected, and calls the Fornication Charity; all her discourse to me was
flat bawdry, which I could not chide, but spoke as flat as she, till she
rebuked me, calling mine beastliness, and hers, Natural Philosophy; By this
day, if I were to marry, I would as soon have chosen a drawn whore out of mine
own Hospital, and cure the sins of her youth, as marry a she-Chirurgeon; one
that for her sins in her first Husbands days cures all the crimes of her Sex
in my time. I would have him call her Chiron, the Centaur's own Daughter; a
Surgeon by Sire and Damm, Apollo's own Colt, she is red-hair'd too, like that
bonny beast with the golden Mane and flaming tail


You had a long discourse with her, Jolly; what wa'st about?


I was advising her to be divorced, and marry the Man in the Almanac; 'twould
be fine pastime for her to lick him whole


By this day, I never saw such a Mule as her Husband is, to bear with her
madness; the house is a good house, and well furnished


Yes, but it is such a sight to see great French Bedds full of found (...), sons
of Batchelors, Priests Heirs, Bridewell Orphans; there they lie by dozens in a
Bed, like sucking Rabbets in a dish, or a row of pins; and then they keep a
whole Dairy of milch Whores to suckle them


She is succesful, and that spoils her, and makes her deaf to counsel; I bad
him poison two or three, to disgrace her; for the Vanity and Pride of their
remedies make those Women more diligent then their Charity


I asked him why he married her; and he confessed, if he had been sound he had
never had her


He confessed, she cured him of three Claps before he married her.


Yes, and I believe some other member (though then ill affected) pleaded more
then his tongue; and the Rogue is like to find her business still, for he flies
at all; My God, I owe thee thanks for many things; but it is not the least, I am
not her Husband, nor a Country Gentleman, whither I believe you cannot easily
seduce me again, unless you can persuade London to stand in the Country; To
Hide Park, or so, I may venture upon your Lady-fair days, when the Filly
Foales of fifteen come kicking in, with their Maines and tails tied up in
Ribbands, to see their eyes roll and neigh, when the Spring makes their blood
prick them; so far I am with you by the way of a Country Gentleman and a
Beer-drinker


For all this dislike, Master Jolly; your greatest acquaintance lies amongst
Country Gentlemen


I, at London, there your Country Gentlemen are good Company, where to be seen
with them is a kind of credit; I come to a Mercers shop in your Coach; Boy,
call your Master; he comes bare, I whisper him, Do you know the Constants and
the Sadds of Norfolk? yes, yes, he replies, and strokes his beard; they are
good Men cry I, yes, yes; No more, cut me off three suits of Satin, he does
it, and in the delivery whispers, Will these be bound? pish, drive on Coachman,
speak with me to morrow


And what then?


What then? why, come again next day.


And what if the Country Gentleman will not be bound?


Then he must fight.


I would I had known that before I had signed your Bond, I would have set my
sword sooner then my Seal to it


Why, if thou repent there is no harm done, fight rather then pay it.


Why, do you think I dare not fight?


Yes, but I think thou have more wit then to fight with me; for if I kill thee,
it is a fortune to me, and others will sign in fear; and if thou should kill
me, any body that knows us would swear 'twere very strange, and cry, there is
Gods just judgment now upon that lewd youth, and thou procur'st his hang-mans
place at the rate of thy Estate


By this hand, he is in the right; and for mine I meant to pay when I signed;
hang it, never put good fellows to say, prithee give me a hundred pounds


It Is true, it is a good ganty way of begging; yet, for being killed, if I
refuse it, would there were no more danger in the Widows unkindness, then in
your fighting; I would not mistrust my design


Why I, there is a point now in nicity of Honor, I should kill you for her;
for, you know I pretended first; and it may be if I had writ sad lines to her,
and hid my self in my Cloak, and haunted her Coach, it may be in time she would
have sought me; not I, by this hand, I Will not trouble my self for a Wench, and
married Widows are but Customary authorized Wenches


Being of that Opinion, how can thou to think of marrying one?


Why, faith, I know not, I thought to rest me, for I was run out of breath with
pleasure, and grew so acquainted with si^, I would have been good (for
variety;) in these thoughts, 'twas my fortune to meet with this Widow,
handsome, and of a clear Fame


Did love her?


Yes, faith? I had Love, but not to the disease that makes men sick; and I
could have loved her still, but that I was angry to have her refuse me for a
fault I told her of my self, so I went no more


Did she forbid you but once?


Faith, I think I slipped a fair Opportunity, a handsome wench, and three
thousand pounds per annum in certainty, besides the possibility of being saved


Which now you think desperate?


That is you; Cross or Pile, will you have him yet or no?


Peace, observe them.


Faith no, I do not despair, but I cannot resolve.


Who are those?


Captain, whither in such haste? what defeated? call you this a retreat, or a
flight from your friends


Your Nephew, and his Governor, and his Friend! here will be a Scene, sit
close, and we may know the secret of their hearts


They have not met yet since they returned, I shall love this bay window.


Prithee let me go, there is mischief a Boiling; and if thou shak'st me once
more thou will Jumble a lie together I have been hammering this hour


A pox upon you, a studying lies?


Why, then they are no lies, but something in the praise of an old Ladies
Beauty, what do you call that


Who are those?


Is It not the Captain, and my Friend?


Ned Wild? Tom Careless? What ayl'st thou, do thou scorn my embraces?


I see you have never been abroad, else you would know how to put a value upon
those whose careful observation brought home the most Exquisite Garb and
Courtship that Paris could sell us


A pox on this fooling, and leave off Ceremony.


Why then agreed, off with our masks, and let us embrace


Faith, say, where have you spent these three years time? in Our Neighbor
France? or have you ventured over the Alps, to see the seat of the Caesar's


And can tell us (Ignorant, doomed to walk upon our own Land) how large a seat
the Goddess fixed her flying Trojans in


Yes, yes, and have seen, and drunk (perhaps) of Tybers famous stream.


And have been where Aeneas buried his Trumpeter, and his Nurse; Tom looks as
if he had sucked the one, and had a Battle sounded by the other, for Joy to see
our Nation ambitious not to be understood or known when they come home


So, now I Am welcome home, this is freedom, and these are Friends, and with
these I can be merry; for Gentlemen, you must give me leave to be free to


So you will spare us miserable men, condemned tc London, and the Company of a
Michelmas Term, and never traveled those Countries that set Mountains on fire a
purpose to light us to our lodging


Why this is better then to stay at home, and lie by hearsay, wearing out your
selves and Fortunes like your clothes, to see her that hates you for being so
fine, then appearing at a Play dressed like some part of it, while the Company
admire the Mercers and the Tailors work, and swear they have done their parts
to make you fine Gentlemen


Then leap out of your Coach, and throw your Cloak over your shoulder, the
Casting Nets to catch a Widow, while we have seen the world, and learned her
Customs


Yes, Sir, and returned perfect Mounsieurs.


Yes, even to their diseases; I confess my Ignorance; I cannot amble, nor ride
like S. George at Waltham.


Yet, upon my Conscience, he may be as welcome with a trot, as the other with
his pace; and faith, Jack, (to be a little free) tell me, do thou not think
thou had been as well to pass here, with that English Nose thou carryedst
hence, as with the French tongue thou have brought home


It is an Accident, and to a Soldier it is but a scar; it is true, such a sign
upon Mr. Jolly's face had been as ill as a Red Cross, and Lord have mercy upon
us, at his lodging door, to have kept women out of Court


For ought you know of the Court.


I know the Court, and thee, and thy use, and how you serve but as the
handsomest movables, a kind of Implement above stairs, and look much like one
of the old Court Servants in the hangings


But that they move, and look fresher, and your Apparel more Modern.


Yet, faith, their Office is the same, to adorn the Room, and be gazed on:
Alas! he is sad, Courage man, these riding clothes will serve thee at the
latter day


Which is one of their grievances, for nothing troubles them more then to think
they must appear in a foul winding sheet, and come undrest


Gentlemen, I am glad to find you know the Court; we know a Traveller too,
especially when he is thus changed and Exchanged, as your Worships, both in
Purse and Person, and have brought home foreign visages and Inscriptions


Why that is their perfection, their ambition to have it said, there go those
that have profitably observed the vices of other Countries, and made them their
own; and the faults of several Nations, at their return, are their Parts


Why there is Jack Careless, he carried out as good stable manners as any was in
Suffolk, and now he is returned with a shrug, and a trick to stand crooked,
like a skirvy Bow unbent, and looks as if he would maintain Oil and Sallads
against a Chyne of Beef; I knew a great Beast of this kind, it haunted the
Court much, and would scarcely allow us (fully reduced to Civility) for serving
up Mutton in whole joints


What, silent?


Faith, the Captain is in a study.


Do, do, Conn the Rivers and Towns perfectly, Captain; thou may become
Intelligencer to the People, and lie thy two sheets a week in Corrantoes too


And could you not make Friends at Court, to get their Pictures cut ugly, in
the Corner of a Map, like the old Navigators


We Will see, we will see.


I Will interrupt them; Servant, you're welcome to Town; how now, Nephew? what,
dumb? where are all our traveled tongues


Servant! who does she mean? By this hand, I disclaim the Title.


Captain, Secret has taken Notes, and desires you would instruct her in what
concerns a waiting Woman, and an Old Lady


Very good, yet this shall not save your Dinner.


Nay, while you are in this humor I Will not sell your Companies; and though
Master Jolly be incensed, I hope he will do me the favor to dine with me


Faith, Lady, you mistake me if you think I am afraid of a widow; for I would
have the world know I dare meet her any where, but at Bed


No more Aunt, we will come; and if you will give us good meat, weel bring good
humors, and good stomachs.


By this day I Will not dine there, they take a pleasure to raise a spirit that
they will not lay, I Will to Banks's


A Pox forbid it, you shall not break Company, now you know what we are to do
after Dinner


I will consent, upon condition you forbid the spiritual Nonsense the age
calls Platonic Love


I must away too; But I Will be there at Dinner, you will join in a Plot after
dinner


Any thing, Good, Bad, or Indifferent, for a Friend and Mirth.


I must go and prevent the Rogues mischief, with the Old Lady.


AWay, unworthy, false, ungrateful; with what Brow dare thou come again into
my sight, knowing how unworthy you have been, and how false to love


No, it is you are unworthy, and deserve not those truths of Love I have paid
here; else you would not believe every report that Envy brings, and condemn,
without hearing me, whom you have so often tried and found faithful


Yes, till I too credulous had pity on your tears; till I had mercy you durst
not be false


Nor am not yet.


What do thou call False? is there a treachery beyond what thou have done;
when I had given my Fame, my Fortune, my self, and my husbands honor, all in
one Obligation, a sacrifice to that Passion; which thou seem to labor with
despair of, to tell and Brag of a conquest over a Woman, fooled by her Passion,
and lost in her love to thee, unworthy; --


By this Day, it is as false as he that said it; hang him, son of a Batchelour;
a slave that envying my Fortune in such a happiness as your love, and chaste
embraces, took this way to ruin it; Come, dry your Eyes, and let the guilty
weep; if I were guilty I durst as soon approach a Constable drunk, as come
here; you know I am your slave


You swore so, and honor made me leave to triumph over your miseries.


Do you repent that I am happy? if you do, command my death.


Nay, never weep, nor sit sadly, I am Friends, so you will only talk and
discourse; for it is your company I only covet


No, you cannot forgive, because you have injured me; it is right woman's
Justice; Accuse first, and harder to reconcile when they are guilty, then when
they are Innocent, or else you would not turn from me thus


You know your youth has a strong power over me; Turn those bewitching Eyes
away; I cannot see them with safety of mine honor


Come you shall not hide your Face, there is a Charm in it against those that
come burnt with unchaste fires; for let but your Eyes or Nose drop upon his
heart it would burn it up, or quench it strait


No Cogging, you have injured me; and now though my


So, the storm is laid, I must have those Pearls -- she should me away with
her mouth, I Will to her again


Where are you? what do you take me for? why you


Uncivil! By thy chaste self, I cannot, Chick; thou have such a terror, such a
guard in those eyes, I dare not approach thee, nor can I gaze upon so much
fire; Prithee, Sirrah, let me hide me from their power here


You presume upon the weakness of our sex; what shall I say or do? Tyrant Love!


There Is a charm in those Pearls; pull them off; if they have a Frost in them,
let me wear them, and then we are both safe


I would you had taken them sooner, I had then been innocent, and might with
whiteness have worn my love which I shall never outlive


Dear, do not too fast pour in my joys, lest I too soon reach my heaven.


Be gone then, lest we prove (having gained that height) this sad truth in
Love; The first minute after noon is night


Part now? The Gods forbid; take from me first this load of joys you have
thrown upon me; for it is a burden harder to bear then sadness; I was not born
till now, this my first night in which I reap true bliss


No, no; I would it had been your first night, then your falsehood had not given
argument for these tears; and I hate my self to think I should be such a
foolish fly, thus again to approach your dangerous flame


Come, divert these thoughts; I Will go see your Closet.


No, no, I swear you shall not.


You know, I am going out of Town for two days.


When you return, I Will show it you; you will forget me else when you are gone,
and at Court


Can your love endure delays? or shall business thee from hence remove? these
were your own Arguments; come, you shall show it me


Nay, then I perceive what unworthy way your love would find; Ye Gods, are all
men false


As I live, you shall stay; come, you ought to make me


Ah! As I live, I will not, I have sworn; do not pull me, I will not be damned,
I have sworn. --


As I live, I Will break your Bodkin then, a weeping Tyrant! Come; by this good
day, you shall be merciful


Why, you will not be uncivil; you will not force me, will you? As I live, I
will not


Nay, and you be wilful, I can be stubborn too.


Hang me, I Will call aloud, why Nan! nay, you may force me; But, As I live, I Will
do nothing


A Pox upon you, are you eathed? The Rogue has got her Neck-lace of Pearl; but
I hope he will leave the Rope to hang me in, how the pox came they so great? I
must have some trick to break his neck, else the young Rogue will work me out;
it is an excellent old Lady, but I dare not call her so; yet would she were
young enough to bear, we might do some good for our heirs, by leaving such a
charitable brood behind; she is a woman after the first kind; it is but going in
to her and you may know her; then she will oblige so readily, and gives with
greater thanks then others receive, takes it so kindly to be courted. I am now
to oblige her (as she calls it) by professing young Wilds love, and desiring an
assurance; she is sensible of his sufferings, which though it be false, and
beyond my Commission, yet the hopes of such a new young thing that has the
vogue of the Town, for handsomest, 'twill so tickle her age, and so blow up her
vanity, to have it said, He is in love with her, and so endear her to me for
being the means that the Parsons malice will be able to take no root; -- She
comes, I must not be seen. --


Give me that Letter I Will swear, you shall not read it.


Take it, I Will away, What time shall I call you, in the evening? there is a Play
at Court to night


I would willingly be there, but your Ladies are so censorious, and malicious
to us young Ladies, in the Town, especially to me, because the Wits are pleased
to afford me a visit, or so; I could be content else to be seen at Court; Pray
what humor is the Queen of? the Captain of her Guard I know


The Queen? Who Is that knocks at the backdoor. --


Smooth my Band, I know not, go down that way, and look you be not false; if
you should be false, I Will swear, I should spoil my self with weeping


Farewell, in the evening I Will call you.


Who Is there? Captain? Where have you been all this while; I might sit alone, I
see, for you, if I could not find conversation in Books.


Faith, Madam, friends newly come to Town engaged me, and my stay was civility
rather then desire, what Book's that


I Will swear he was a Witch that writ it; for he speaks my thoughts as if he had
been within me; the Original, they say, was French


Oh, I know it, it is the accomplished Woman, Your self, he means by this, while
you are your self


Indeed, I confess, I am a great friend to conversation, if we could have it
without suspicion; But the world's so apt to judge, that it is a prejudice to
our honor now to salute a man


Innocence, Madam, is above opinion, and your fame's too great to be shook with
whispers


You are ever civil, and therefore welcome; pray, what news is there now in
Town? for I am reclus'd here; unless it be yours, I receive no visits; and I Will
swear, I charged the Wench to day not to let you in; I wonder she let you come


Faith, Madam, if it had been my own business I should not have ventured so
boldly; But the necessity that forces me to come concerns my friend, against
whom if your mercy be now bounded with those strict ties of honor, and cold
thoughts which I have ever found guard your heart, My friend, a young and
handsome man, is lost, is lost in his prime, and falls like early blossoms; But
methinks you should not prove the envious frost to destroy this young man, this
delicate young man, that has whole bundles of Boys in his Breeches; yet if you
be cruel, he and they dye, as useless as open Arses gathered green.


Good Captain, out with the particular, what way can my charity assist him; you
know by experience I cannot be cruel, remember how I fetched you out of a
swoond, and laid you in my own bed


That act preserved a life, that has always been labored in your service; and
I dare say, your charity here will find as fruitful a gratitude


But, I hope, he will not be so uncivil as you were; I Will swear, I could have
hanged you for that Rape, if I would have followed the Law; but I forgave you
upon condition you would do so again; but what is this young man you speak of


Such is my love to you and him, that I cannot prefer mine own particular
before your contents; else I Would have poisoned him ere I Would have brought him to
your house


Why, I pray?


Because, he is young, handsome, and sound parts; that I Am sure will ruin me
here


His love may make all these beauties, else I have an honor will defend me
against him, were he as handsome as young Wild


Why I, there it is; that one word has removed all my fears and jealousies with
a despair; for that is the man whose Love, Life and Fortune, lies at your feet;
and if you were single, by lawful ways he would hope to reach what now he
despairs of


Let him not despair, Love is a powerful pleader, and youth and beauty will
assist him; and if his love be noble I can meet it; for there is none that
sacrifices more to friendship-love, then I


My friends interest makes me rejoice at this; dare you trust me to say this to
him, though it be not usual, pray speak; Nay, you are so long still a resolving
to be kind: Remember, charity is as great a virtue as chastity, and greater, if
we will hear nature plead; for the one may make many Maids, the other can but
preserve one: But I know you will be persuaded, let be my importunity that
prevailed, shall I bring him hither one evening


Why do you plead thus? pray be silent, and when you see him, tell him he has a
seat here, and I --


Out with it, what is it? shall he call you Mistress? and his Platonic?


Away, away; Me?


No niceness, is it a match?


Lord, would I were as worthy as willing (pray tell him so) he shall find me
one of the humblest Mistresses that ever he was pleased to honor with his
affections


Dare you write this to him, and honor me with bearing it? I confess, I am
such a friend to friendship-love too that I would even bring him on my back to
a mid-nights meeting


If you will stay here, I Will go in and write it. --


Madam, I forgot to ask your Ladyship one Question.


What was it?


There happened a business last night betwixt Mr. Wild and one Jolly, a Courtier
that brags extremely of your favor; I swear, if it had not been for friends
that interposed themselves there had been mischief, for Mr. Wild was extreme
zealous in your cause


Such a Rascal I know; Villain, to bring my name upon the Stage, for a subject
of his quarrels, I Will have him cudgeld


And I Will swear, he deserved it; for the quarrel ended in a Bet of a
Buck-hunting-nag, that sometime to day he would bring a Neck-lace and chain of
Pearl of yours (not stolen, but freely given) to witness his power


Did the vain Rascal promise that?


Yes, but we laughed at it.


So you might; and, as I live, if the Neck-lace were come from stringing I Would
send them both to Mr. Wild, to wear as a favor, to assure him I am his, and to
put the vain slave out of countenance


I marry, such a timely favor were worth a dozen Letters, to assure him of
your Love, and remove all the doubts the others discourse may put into his
head; and faith I Would send him the chain now, and in my Letter promise him the
Neck-lace, he will deserve such a favor


I Will go in and fetch it immediately, will you favor me to deliver it?


I Will wait upon your Ladyship.


I Will swear you shall not go in, you know I forswore


Hang me, I Will go in; does my Message deserve to wait an Answer at the Door?


I, but you will be naught.


O, never trust me if I break.


If you break some such forfeit you will lose; Well, come in for once.


You are so suspicious.


I Will swear, I have reason for it, you are such another man.


IS he gone?


Yes, he is gone to the old Ladies, high with mischief.


Fare him well, easy Fool, how the Trout strove to be tickled, and how does
this Ring become me? Ha! they are


Besides the good custom of putting so much Gold in 'em, they bring such
conveniences along


Why I, now I have but one to please; and if I please him, who dares offend me?
and that Wife's a fool that cannot make her Husband one


Nay, I am absolutely of Opinion, it was fit for you to marry; but whether he
be a good Husband or no


A pox of a good Husband, give me a wise one; they only make the secure
Cuckolds, the Cuckold in grain; for die a Husband that has wit but with an
Opinion thou art honest, and see who dares wash the color out; Now your fool
changes with every drop, dotes with confidence in the Morning and at Night,
jealous even to Murder, and his Love (Lord help us) fades like my Gredaline
Petticote


This is a new Doctrine.


It Is a truth, Wench, I have gained from my own Observations, and the Paradox
will be maintained. Take wise Men from Cuckolds, and fools to make them; for
your wise Man draws eyes and suspicion with his visit, and begets jealous
thoughts in the Husband, that his Wife may be overcome with his parts; when the
fool is welcome to both, pleases both, laughes with the one, and lies with the
other, and all without suspicion; I tell thee, a fool that has money is the
Man. The wits and the we's, which is a distinct Parreal of Wit bound by it
self, and to be sold at Wit-hall, or at the sign of the King's Head in the
Butchery; these wise things will make twenty jealous, ere one Man a Cuckold;
when the family of fools will head a Parish ere they are suspected


Well, I see one may live and learn; and if he be but as good at it now, you
are his own; as he was, when he was your Friends Friend, (as they call it) you
have got one of the best hiders of such a business in the Town; Lord, how he
would Sister you at a Play


Faith, it is as he is used at first; if he get the bridle in's teeth he will ride
to the Devil; but if thou be true, we'll make him amble ere we have done;
the Plot is here, and if it thrive I Will alter the Proverb, The Parson gets the
Children, to, the Parson Fathers them


Any thing that may get Rule; I love to wear the Breeches.


So do we all, Wench; Empire? it is all our aim; and I Will put my ranting Roger
in a Cage but I Will tame him; he loves already, which is an excellent Ring in a
fools nose, and thou shall hear him sing. --

Happy only is that Family, that shows
A Cock that is silent, and a Hen that crows.

Do this, I Will serve you for nothing; the impetuous slave had wont to taunt me
for beating of my Husband, and would sing that song in mockery of me


In Revenge of which, thou (if thou will be faithful) shall make him sing.

Happy is that Family that shows
A Cock that is silent, and a Hen that crows.

GO, you are a naughty Man; do you come hither to rail against an honest
Gentleman? I have heard how you fell out, you may be ashamed on it, a Man of
your Coat


What? to speak Truth and perform my Duty? the world cries out you are a scab'd
sheep, and I come to tarr you, that is, give you notice how your Fame suffers
in the opinion of the world


My Fame, Sirrah? it is purer then thy Doctrine, get thee out of my house.


You uncivil fellow, do you come hither to tell my Lady of her faults, as if
her own Levite could not discern 'em


My own Levite? I hope he is better bred then to tell me of my faults.


He finds work enough to correct his dearly beloved sinners.


And the Right Worshipful my Lady, and your self, they mend at leisure.


You are a saucy fellow, Sirrah, to call me Sinner in my own house; get you
gone with -- your Madam, I hear, and (Madam) I could advise, but I am loath to
speak; take heed, the world talks, and thus with dark sentences put my
Innocence into a fright, with you know what you know good Mistress Faithful;
so do I, and the world shall know too thou have married a Whore


Madam, a Whore?


No, Sir, it is not so well as a Madam-whore, it is a poor Whore, a Captains cast
Whore


Now bless me, marry a Whore? I wonder any Man can endure those things, what
kind of Creatures are they


They Are like Ladies, but that they are handsomer; and though you take a
privilege to injure me, yet I would advise your Woman to tie up her Tongue,
and not abuse my Wife


Fie, art thou not ashamed to call a Whore, Wife? Lord bless^ns, what will not
these men do when God leaves them! But for a Man of your Coat to cast himself
away upon a Whore, come Wench, let us go and leave him! I Will swear, it is
strange, the State does not provide to have all Whores hanged or drowned


I, and it is time they look into it, for they begin to spread so, that a man
can scarce find an honest woman in a Country; they say, they are voted down now,
'twas moved by that charitable Member that got an Order to have it but five
miles to Croyden, for ease of the Market-women


I, I, it is a blessed Parliament.


That I have played the fool, is visible; this comes of rashness; something I
must do to set this right, or else she will hate, and he will laugh at me, I must not
lose him, and my revenge too, something that is mischief, I am resolved to do


NOW is the Parsons Wife so contemptible?


No, but I Am so full of that resolution to dislike the sex, that I will allow
none honest, none handsome; I tell thee, we must beat down the price with our
selves, court none of 'em; but let their Maiden-heads and their Faces lie upon
their hands, till they are weary of the commodity, then they will haunt us to find
proper Chap-men to deal for their ware


I like this, but 'twil be long a doing, and it may be er'e they be forced to
sell, our bank will be exhausted, and we shall not be able to purchase


I, but we will keep a credit, and at three six months, thou and the Captain
shall be my Factors


You had best have a partner, else such an undertaking would break a better
back then yours


No partners in such commodities, your Factor that takes up Maiden-heads, it is
upon his own account still


But what course will you take to purchase this trade with women?


I am resolved to put on their own silence and modesty, answer forsooth, swear
nothing but Gods nigs, and hold Arguments of their own cold Tenants, as if I
believed there were no true love below the line, then sigh when it is proper,
and with forced studies betray the enemy, who seeing my eye fixed on her, her
vanity thinks I am lost in admiration, calls and shakes me ere I wake out of my
design, and being collected, answer out of purpose. Love, divinest? yes, who is
it that is mortal and does not, or which amongst all the Senate of the Gods,
can gaze upon those eyes, and carry thence the power he brought? This will
start her


Yes, and make her think thee mad.


Why that is my design; for then I start too, and rub my eyes, as if I waked,
then sigh and strangle a yawn, 'till I have wrung it into tears, with which I
rise, as if overcome with grief; then kiss her hands, and let fall those
witnesses of faith and love, bribed for my design. This takes; for who would
suspect such a Devil as Craft and Youth to live together


But what kind of women do you think this will take?


All kind of women, those that think themselves handsome; it being probable,
concludes it real; and those that are handsome in their opinion, that small
number will believe it, because it agrees with their wishes


And when you are gone, it may be they sigh, and their Love breaks out into
Paper, and what then


What then? why then I Will laugh, and show thee their Letters, and teach the
world how easy it is to win any woman


This is the way, and be sure to dislike all, but her you design for; be scarce
civil to any of the sex besides


That Is my meaning, But to her that I mean my prey, all her slave; she shall be
my Deity; and her opinion my religion


And while you sad it thus to one, I Will talk freer then a priviledg'd fool, and
swear as unreasonably as losing Gamesters, and abuse thee for thinking to
reclaim a woman by thy love, call them all bowls thrown that will run where
they will run, and Lovers like fools run after them, Crying, Rub, and fly, for
me; I believe none fair, none handsome, none honest, but the kind


We must make the Captain of our Plot, lest he betray us; this will gain us
some revenge upon the Lovers to whom I grudge the Wenches, not that I believe
they are worth half the cost they pay for them; and we may talk, but it is not
our opinion can make them happier, or miserable


Jolly, Will, where have thou been? We had such sport with the Parson of our
Town, he is married this morning to Wanton


Who? the Captains Wench? he is in a good humor then; as you love mirth, let us
find him, I have news to blow his rage with, and 'twill be mirth to us, to see
him divided betwixt the several causes of his anger, and lose himself in his
rage while he disputes, which is the greater; your opinion, Gentlemen; is this,
or his Wench, the greater loss?


What have thou there? Pearl! they are false, I hope.


Why do you hope so?


Because I am thy friend, and would be loath to have thee hanged for stealing.


I will not swear they are honestly come by; but I Will be sworn, there is neither
force nor theft in it


Prithee, speak out of Riddles, here is none but your Friends.


Faith, take it, you have heard the Captain brag of an old Lady, which he
thinks he keeps close in a Box; but I know where hangs a key can let a friend
in, or so: From her, my brace of worthies, whose wits are dulled with plenty,
this morning, with three good words, and four good deeds, I earned this toy


The mirth yet, we will all share; I am in pain till we sind him, that we may
vex his wit that he presumes so much on


Let Us go, let us go, I will desire him to let me see his Wench; I will not
understand him if he says she is gone


I Will beg of him, for old acquaintance sake, to let me see his old Lady.


Hark, I hear his voice. --


Which way?


The Game plays it self; begin with him, Ned, while we talk, as if we were
busy, we will take our Q


When I put off my hat.


'sBlood, I thought you had been sunk, I have been hunting you these four
hours. Death, you might ha left word where you went; and not put me to hunt
like Tom Fool, it is well you are at London, where you know the way home


Why in choler? We have been all this while searching you; come, this is put on
to divert me for claiming your promise, I must see the Wench


You cannot a dad, a dad you cannot.


I did not think you would have refused such a kindness.


What Is that?


Nothing, a toy, he refuses to show me his Wench.


The Devil he does; what have we been thus long Comrades, and had all things in
common, and must we now come to have common Wenches particular? I say, thou
shall see her, and lie with her too, if thou will


What? in thy dumps, Brother, call to thy aid thy two edged wit; the Captain
sad? it is prophetic, I Would as live have dreamt of Pearl, or the loss of my
teeth; yet if he be musty, I Will warrant thee, Ned, I Will help thee to a bout; I
know his Cloak, his long Cloak that hides her; I am acquainted with the Parson,
he shall befriend thee


It Is very well, Gentlemen; but none of you have seen her yet?


Yes, but we have, By thy self, by thy anger, which is now bigger then thou; By
chance we crossed her, coming from Church, leading in her hand the Parson, to
whom she swore she was this day married


And our friendships were now guiding us to find thee out, to comfort thee
after the treachery of thy Levite


Come, bear it like a man, there are more Wenches, What have thou spied? --


His Pearl, I believe.


Gentlemen, I see you are merry; I Will leave you; I must go a little way, to
enquire about a business


Has got a sore-eye, I think.


I will only ask one Question, and return.


No faith, stay, and be satisfied.


Do, good Brother, for I believe there is no question that you now would ask,
but here is an Oracle can resolve you


Are those Pearl true?


Yes?


And did not you steal them?


No.


Nor he did not buy them with ready money; But took them upon Mortgage of
himself to an old Lady


Dwelling at the sign of the Buck in Broad-street; are you satisfied, or must I
play the Oracle still


No, no, I am satisfied.


Like Jealous men, that take their wives at it, are you not?


Well, very well, it is visible, I am abused on all hands; But Gentlemen, why
all against me


To let you see your Wit's mortal, and not proof against all.


The Parson has shot it through with a Jest.


Gentlemen, which of you, faith, had a hand in that?


Faith, none; only a general Joy, to find the Captain over reached.


But do you go sharers in the Profit, as well as in the Jest?


No faith, the Toy's mine own.


They are very fine, and you may afford a good penny worth, will you sell them?


Sell them? I, where is a Chapman?


Here, I Will purchase them.


Thou? No, no, I have barred thee, By and Mayn, for I am resolved not to fight
for them; that excludes thy purchase by the sword; and thy wench has proved
such a loss, in thy last Adventure of Wit, that I Am afraid, it will spoil thy
credit that way too


Gentlemen, as a Friend, let me have the refusal, set your price.


He Is serious.


Leave fooling.


Why if thou could buy them, what would thou do with them.


They Are very fair Ones, let me see them, methinks they should match very well
with these


These, which?


Which?


They are true.


Yes, But not earned with a pair of stolen verses, of, I was not born till now,
this my first night, and so forsooth; nor given as a Charm against lust


What means all this?


What? why it is truth, and it means to shame the Devil; by this good day, he
repeats the same words with which I gathered these Pearls


Why then we have two to laugh at.


And all Friends hereafter, let us fool altogether.


Gentlemen with the fine Wits, and my very good Friends do you, or you, or he
think I Will keep you Company, to make you laugh, but that I draw my honey from
you too


Come, come, the Captain's in the right.


Yes, yes, the Captain knows it, and dares tell you, your Wit, your Fortune,
and his Face, are but my Ploughs; and I would have my fine Mounsieur know, who,
in spite of my Counsel, will be finer then his Mistress, and appears before
her so curiously built she dares not play with him for fear of spoiling him;
and to let him know the truth I speak, To his fair hands I present this letter,
but withal give him to understand, the Contents belong to me.


The Pearl are sent to me.


I deny that, unless you prove you sent me; for the Letter begins, Sir, this
noble Gentleman, the bearer, whom you are pleased to make the messenger of your
love, and so forth; And now you should do well to enquire for that noble
Gentleman, and take an Account of him how he has laid out your Love, and it
may be he will return you Pearl for it; and now Gentlemen, I dare propose a
peace, at least a Cessation of Wit (but what is defensive) till such time as
the Plot which is now in my head be effected, in which you have all your shares


So she knows I have not the Pearl, I am content.


She Will quickly find that, when she see's you come not to night, according to
my appointment, and hear's I have sold the Pearl


Here then cease our Offensive War.


I Will give you Counsel worth two Ropes of Pearl.


But the Wench, how came the Parson to get her?


Faith it is hard to say which labored most, he, or I, to make that Match, but
the knave did well; There it is (if you assist) I mean to lay the Scene of your
mirth to night, for I am not yet fully revenged upon the Rogue; for that I know
him miserable is nothing, till he believe so too; Wanton and I have laid the
Plot


Do you hold Correspondence?


Correspondence? I tell thee the plots we laid to draw him on would make a
Comedy


Sir, the Ladies stay Dinner.


And as we go I Will tell you all the story, and after Dinner, be free from all
Engagements, as we promised thee; and follow but your directions, I Will warrant
you mirth and a pretty Wench


Agreed, any thing that breeds mirth is welcome.


Not a word at the Widows, let them go on quietly, and steal their Wedding too.


I heard a Bird sing, as if it were concluded amongst the Couples.


They have been long about it; my Couze is a girl deserves more haste to her
Bed, he has arrived there by Carriers Journeys


But that I hate wooing, by this good day, I like your Aunt so well and her
humor she should scarce be thrown away upon Pale-face, that has sighed her
into a Wedding Ring, and will but double her Jointure


Why I, thus it should be, pray let us make them the Seat of the war all
Dinner, and continue united and true among our selves, then we may defy all
foreign danger


And with full Bowls let us crown this peace, and sing, Wit, without war, no
Mirth does bring


WAs she deaf to your report?


Yes, yes.


And ugly, her Abigail, she had her say too?


Yes, yes.


And do you walk here biting your Nayls: do you think I Will be satisfied with
such a way of righting me


What would have me do?


Have you no Gall? be abused and laughed at by a dull Captain, that a strict
Muster would turn Fool? you had Wit, and could rail, when I offended you, and
none so sudden, none so terrible, none so sure in his Revenge, when I
displease you


Something I Will do.


Do it then, or I shall curse that e're I saw you Death, let the sign of my
Lady, an out of fashion whore, that has paid for sin, ever since yellow starch
and wheel Fardingales were cried down, let her Abuse me, and say nothing? if
this passes


As Christ bless me, but I did (sweet heart:) and if it were not Church livings
are mortal, and they are always hitting me in the teeth with a man of your
Coat, she should find I am no Church man within, nor Mr. Parson but in my Coat;
Come to Dinner, and after Dinner I Will do something


I shall do something will vex some body.


Will you please to come to Dinner? the Company stays.


Come, let us go in.


No, I must walk a little to digest this breakfast, the guests else will
wonder to see I am troubled


Come, let this day pass in Mirth, spite of mischief, for lucks sake.


I Will follow you, and do what I can to be merry.


Why, he stands already.


Peace, let me alone, I Will make him Jostle, like the Millers Mare, and stand
like the Dun Cow, till thou may milk him


Pray break him of his miserableness, it is one of the chief Exceptions I have
against him; he reared a puppy once, till it was ten days old, with three hap'
worth of milk, and then with his own Dagger slew it, and made me dress it:
blessed my self to see him eat it, and he bid me beg the Litter, and swore it was
sweeter and wholsomer then sucking Rabbets, or London Pigs, which he called
Belmens issue


Hark, he calls me, we must humor him a little, he will


YOu re welcome all, but especially Master Jolly; no reply, with I thank your
Ladyship


I beseech you, Sir, let us never be better acquainted.


I shall endeavor, Lady, and fail in nothing that is in my


I rejoice at it, for the less Love, the better welcome still.


And as ever you had an ounce of Love for the Widow, be not Friends among your
selves


Aunt, though we were at strife when we were alone, yet now we unite like a
Politic State against the common Enemy


The common Enemy, what is that?


Women, and Lovers in general.


Nay, then we have a party Niece, claim; quickly, now is the time, according to
the Proverb; Keep a thing seven years, and then if thou have no use on it
throw't away


Agreed, let us challenge our Servants; by the Love they have profes'd, they
cannot in honor refuse to join with us; and see where they come. --


Sir, it is done.


Be secret and grave, I Will warrant our design will take as we can wish.


Sweet Mistress Pleasant.


Servant Sadd.


Madam.


We are threatened to have a War waged against us, will you not second us?


With these youths we'll do enough, Madam.


I Will swear my Servant gave hit for hit this morning, as if he had been a
Master in the Noble Science of Wit


Mine laid about him with spik and span new Arguments, not like the same Man,
his old sayings and Presidents laid by


Thus armed, then, we'll stand and defy them.


Where Is your Points, sure Aunt, this should be your Wedding day, for you have
taken the Man for better for worse


No, Nephew, this will not prove the day that we shall either give or take a
Ring


Hang me, if I know you can go back again with your Honor.


Or in Justice refuse him Liberty, that has served out his time; either marry
him or provide for him, for he is maimed in your service


Why Servant Sadd? you will arm; my Nephew has thrown the first dart at you.


Have hit, have hit?


No, Captain, 'twas too wide.


Too wide? Marry he is an ill Marks-man that shoots wider then a Widow.


We are both in one hole, Captain; but I was loath to venture my Opinion, lest
her Ladyship should think I was angry; for I have a good mind to fall upon the
Widow


You're a constant Man, Master Jolly; you have been in that mind this
twelve-months day


You are in the right, Madam; she has it to show under his hand, but she will
not come in the List with him again; she threw him the last year


Come, shall we eat Oysters? Who Is there? call for some Wine, Master Jolly; you
are not warm yet, pray be free, you are at home


Your Ladyship is merry.


You do not take it ill, to have me assure you you are at home here?


Such another invitation (though in jest) will take away Master Sadds stomach.


No, faith, Ned, though she should take him, it will not take away my stomach;
my Love is so fixed I may wish my wishes, but she shall never want them to wait
upon hers


A Traitor, bind him, has pulled down a side; profess your Love thus public?


I by my faith, continue Master Sadd, give it out you Love, and call it a new
Love, a Love never seen before, we'll all come to it as your Friends


Gentlemen, still I Love; and if she to whom I thus sacrifice will not reward
it, yet the worst Malice can say, is, I was unfortunate and misfortunate; not
false made me so


In what Chapter shall we find this written, and what verse? you should preach
with a Method, Master Sadd


Gentlemen, if ever he spoke so much dangerous sense before (either of Love or
Reason) hang me


Madam, my Love is no news where you are; Know, your scorn has made it public;
and though it could gain no return from you; yet others have esteemed me for
the Faith and Constancy I have paid here


Did not I foretell you of his Love? I foresaw this danger, shall I never live
to see Wit and Love dwell together


I am but a poor Soldier, and yet never reached to the Honor of being a
Lover; yet from my own observations, Master Sadd, take a Truth; it is a folly to
believe any Woman loves a Man for being constant to another, they dissemble
their hearts only; and hate a Man in Love worse then a Wencher


And they have Reason; for if they have the grace to be kind, he that loves the
Sex may be theirs


When your constant Lover, if a Woman have a mind to him, and be blessed with so
much grace to discover it; He, out of the noble mistake of Honor hates her for
it, and tells it perchance, and preaches Reason to her Passion, and cries,
miserable Beauty, to be so unfortunate as to inhabit in so much frailty


This counsel makes her hate him more then she loved before; These are
troubles, those that love are subject to, while we look on and laugh, to see
both thus slav'd while we are free


My prayers still shall be, Lord deliver me from Love.


It Is Plague, Pestilence, Famine, Sword, and sometimes sudden death.


Yet I love, I must love, I will love, and I do love.


In the present tense.


No more of this Argument, for Loves sake.


By any means, Madam, give him leave to love, and you are resolved to walk tied
up in your own Arms, with your Love as visible in your Face, as your
Mistresses colors in your Hat; that any Porter at Charing Cross may take you
like a Letter at the Carriers, and having read the superscription, deliver
Master Sadd to the fair hands of Mistress or my Lady such a one, lying at the
sign of the hard heart


And she, if she has wit (as I believe she has) will scarce pay the Post for
the Packet


Treason, how now Niece, join with the Enemy?


A health, Ned, what shall I call it?


To Master Sadd, he needs it that avowes himself a Lover.


Gentlemen, you have the Advantage, the Time, the Place, the Company; But we
may meet when your wits shall not have such advantage as my Love


No more of Love, I am so sick on it.


By your Pardon, Mistress, I must not leave Love thus unguarded, I vow my self
his follower


Much good may Love do him, give me a Glass of Wine here; Will, let them keep
company with the blind Boy, give us his Mother, and let them preach again; hear
that will, he has good luck, persuades me it is an ugly sin to lie with a
handsome Woman


A pox upon my Nurse, she frighted me so when I was young with stories of the
Devil, I was almost fourteen er'e I could prevail with Reasons to unbind my
Reason, it was so slav'd to Faith and Conscience; she made me believe Wine was
an evil spirit, and Fornication was like the Whore of Babylon, a fine face, but
a Dragon under her Pety-coats; and that made me have a mind to peep under all I
met since


Fie, fie, for shame, do not talk so; are you not ashamed to glory in sin, as
if variety of women were none


Madam, we do not glory in Fornication; and yet I thank God, I cannot live
without a woman


Why, does your Ladyship think it a sin to lie with variety of handsome women?
if it be, would I were the wicked'st man in the company


You have been marked for an indifferent sinner; that way Captain.


Who I? No faith, I was a fool, but and I were to begin again, I would not do
as I have done, I kept one; but if ever I keep another, Hang me; nor would I
advise any friend of mine to do it


Why, I am sure it is a provident and safe way; a man may always be provided and
sound


Fie upon this discourse.


Those considerations betrayed me, A pox; it is a dull sin to travel, like a
Carriers-horse, always one Road


Fie, Captain, repent for shame, and Marry.


Your Ladyship would have said, Marry, and repent; No, though it be not the
greatest pleasure, yet it is better then marrying; for when I am weary of her,
my unconstancy is termed virtue, and I shall be said to turn to grace. Beware
of women, for better for worse; for our wicked nature, when her sport is
lawful, cloyes straight; therefore, rather then Marry keep a Wench


Faith, he is in the right, for it is the same thing in number and kind; and
then the sport is quickened, and made poynant with sin


Yet it is a fault, faith, and I Will persuade all my friends from it; especially
here where any innovation is dangerous; 'twas the newness of the sin that made
me suffer in the opinion of my friends; and I was condemned by all sorts of
people; not that I sinned, but that I sinned no more


Why I, had thou been wicked in fashion, and privily lain with every body,
their guilt would have made them protect thee; so that to be more wicked is to
be innocent at lest safe; A wicked world, Lord help us


But being particular to her, and not in love, nor subject to it, taking an
Antidote every morning, before I venture into those infectious places where
Love Beauty dwells; this enraged the Maiden, Beauties of the Time, who thought
it a prejudice to their Beauties to see me careless, and securely pass by their
conquering eyes; my name being found amongst none of those that decked their
Triumphs. But from this it is easy to be safe, for their Pride will not let
them love, nor my leisure me. Then the old Ladies that pay for their pleasures;
they, upon the news, beheld me wirh their natural frowns, despairing when their
money could not prevail; and hated me when they heard that I for my pleasure
would pay as large as they


Gentlemen, take warning; a Fee from every man; For by this day, there is
strange counsel in this confession


Captain, you forget to pledge Mr. Careless; here, will you not drink a cup of
wine, who is there? Bring the Oysters


Yes, Madam, if you please.


Proceed, Captain.


Fie, Mr. Wild, are you not ashamed to encourage him to this filthy discourse.


A glass of wine then; and I Will drink to all the new married Wives that grieve
to think, at what rate their Fathers purchase a little husband. These when they
lie thirsting for the thing they paid so dear for


These, methinks, should be thy friends, and point thee out as a man for them.


Yes, till the faithful Nurse cries; Alas, Madam, he keeps such a one, he has
enough at home; then she swells with envy and rage against us both, calls my
Mistress ugly, common, unsafe; and me, a weak secure fool


These are strange truths, Madam.


I, I, but these Oysters are a better jest.


But she is abused that will let such reason tame her desire, and a fool in
Loves School; else she would not be ignorant that variety is such a friend to
love, that he which rises a sunk coward from the Ladies bed would find new
fires at her Maids; nor ever yet did the man want fire, if the woman would
bring the fuel


For Gods sake, leave this discourse.


The Captain has a mind we should eat no Oysters.


Aunt, we came to be merry, and we will be merry, and you shall stay it out;
Proceed Captain


Fie Captain, I Am ashamed to hear you talk thus: Marry, then you will have a
better opinion of women


Marry! yes, this knowledge will invite me, it is a good encouragement, is it
not think you? What is your opinion? were not these Marriages made in Heaven?
By this good day, all the world is mad, and makes haste to be fooled, but we
four: And I hope there is none of us believes there has any Marriages been made
in Heaven, since Adam


By my faith, it is thought the Devil gave the Ring there to.


Nephew, I Will swear I Will be gone.


Hold her, Ned, she goes not yet; there is a fourth kind of women that concerns
her more then all the rest, Ecce signum -- She is man; (as they call it) but
for a Wencher no Argument prevails with your Widow; for she believes they have
spent too much that way, to be able to pay her due benevolence


As I live, I Will be gone if you speak one word more of this uncivil subject.


Captain, let me kiss thy cheek, for that Widow; you understand this, Widow? I
say no more; Here Captain, here is to thee; as it goes down, A pox of care


Jesus! Mr. Jolly, have you no observations of the Court, that are so affected
with this of the Town


Faith, they say, there is good sport there, sometimes.


Mr. Jolly is afraid to let us partake of his knowledge.


No faith, Madam.


By this drink, if he stay till I have eaten a few more, I Will describe it.


What should I say, it is certain the Court is the bravest place in the Kingdom,
for sport, if it were well looked to, and the Game preserved fair; But as it is,
a man may sooner make a set in the Strand. And it will never be better, whilst
your divine Lovers inhabit there


Let the King make me Master of the Game.


And admit us Laiety-lovers.


I would he would; for as it is, there is no hopes amongst the Ladies; besides,
it is such an example to see a King and Queen good, Husband and Wife, that to be
kind will grow out of fashion


Nay, that is not all, for the women grow malicious, because they are not
courted; nay, they bred all the last mischiefs, and called the Kings chastity a
neglect of them


Thou art in the right; An Edward, or a Harry, with seven Queens in Buckram,
that Haught among the men, and Stroakt the women, are the Monarchs they wish to
bow to; they love no tame Princes, but Lions in the Forest


Why, and those were properly called the Fathers of their People, that were
indeed akine to their Nobility; now they wear out their youth and beauty,
without hope of a monumental Ballad, or Trophee of a Lie-bell that shall
hereafter point at such a Lord, and cry that is the royal Son of such a one


And these were the ways that made them powerful at home; for the City is a
kind of tame Beast; you may lead her by the horns any whither, if you but
tickle them in the ear sometimes. Queen Bess, of famous memory, had the trick
on it; and I have heard them say, In Eighty eighty, er'e I was born, as well I
can remember, she rode to Tilbury on that bonny Beast, the Mayor


I would I might counsel him; I Would so reform the Court.


Never too soon; for now, when a stranger comes in, and spies a Covey of a
Beauties, would make a Faulconer unhood, before he can draw his Leash he is
warned that is a marked Partridge; and that, and every he, has by their example a
particular she


By this light, the six fair Maids stand like the Workingdays in the Almanac;
one with A scored upon her breast, that is as much to say, I belong to such a
Lord; the next with B for an elder Brother; C for such a Knight; D possessed with
melancholy, and at her breast you may knock an hour er'e you get an answer, and
then she will tell you there is no lodging there; she has a constant fellow
Courtier that has taken up all her heart to his own use: in short, All are
disposed of, but the good Mother; and she comes in like the Sabbath, at the
weeks end; and I warrant her make any one rest that comes at her


I marry; but if she were like the Jews Sabbath, it were somewhat; but this
looks like a Broken Commandment, that has had more work done upon her, then all
the week besides


And what think you, is not this finely carried? you that are about the King,
counsel him, if he will have his sport fair, he must let the Game be free, as
it has been in former Ages; then a stranger that has wit, good means, and
handsome clothes, no sooner enters the privy Chamber, and beat about with three
graceful legs, but he spring a Mistress that danced as well as he, Sung better,
as free as fair; those at first sight could speak, for wit is always
acquainted: These fools must be akin er'e they can speak; and now the friends
make the bargain, and they go to Bed er'e they know why


Faith, he is in the right, you shall have a Buzzard now hover and beat after a
pretty Wench, till she is so weary of him she is forced to take her Bed for
covert, and find less danger in being trussed then in flying


And what becomes of all this pudder, after he has made them sport for one
night, to see him towse the Quarry, he carries her into the Country, and there
they two fly at one another till they are weary


And all this mischief comes of Love and Constancy; we shall never see better
days till there be an Act of Parliament against it; Enjoining Husband not to
Till their Wives, but change and lay them fallow


A pox, the women will never consent to it; they will be tilled to death first.


Gentlemen, you are very bold with the sex.


Faith, Madam, it is our care of them; why you see they are married at
fourteen, yield a Crop and a half, and then dye, it is merely their love that
destroys'em; for if they get a good husbandman, the poor things yield their
very hearts


And do you blame their loves, Gentlemen?


No, not their love, but their discretion; let them love, and do, a Gods name;
but let them do with discretion


But how will you amend this?


Instead of two Beds and a Physician; I Would have the State prescribe two Wives
and a Mistress


Ho! it will never be granted; the State is made up of old men, and they find
work enough with one


We will petition the lower House, there are young men, and (if it were but to
be factious) would pass it, if they thought the upper house would Cross it;
Besides, they ought to do it, Death! they provide against cutting down old
Trees, and preserving highways and Posthorses, and let pretty Wenches run to
decay


Why may it not come within the Statute of Depopulation? As I live, the State
ought to take care of those Pretty creatures; Be you Judge, Madam; Is It not a
sad sight to see a rich young Beauty, with all her Innocence and Blossoms on,
subject to some rough rude Fellow, that ploughs her; and esteems and uses her
as a chattel, till she is so lean, a man may find as good Grass upon the
Common, where it may be she will sit coughing with sunk Eyes, so weak that a Boy
(with a Dog) that can but whistle, may keep a score of them


You are strangely charitable to Our Sex, on a sudden.


I know not what they are; but for my part, I Will be a Traitor ere I Will look on,
and see Beauty go thus to wrack; it is enough, custom has made us suffer them
to be enclosed; I am sure, they were created common, and for the use of Man,
and not intended to be subject to jealousy and choler, or to be bought or
sold, or let for term of lives or years, as they are now, or else sold at
Out-crys; Oh! Yes; who will give most take her


Why do not some of you, Excellent men, Marry, and mend all these Errors, by
your good Example


Because we want Fortunes, to buy rich wives, or keep poor ones, and be loath
to get Beggars, or whores, as well as I love 'em


Why, are all their Children so that have no fortune think you?


No, not all; I have heard of Whittington and his Cat, and others, that have
made Fortunes by strange means; But I scarce believe my Son would rise from
Hope, a half penny, and a Lambsskin; And the Wenches commonly having more Wit
and Beauty then Money, foreseeing small Portions, grow sad, and read Romances,
till their Wit spy some unfortunate merit like their own, without money too,
and they two sigh after one another, till they grow mysterious in Colors, and
become a Proverb for their constancy; and when their Love has worn out the
cause, marry in the end a new Couple, then grown ashamed of the knowledge they
so long hunted, at length part, by consent, and vanish into Abigail and
Governor


Well Gentlemen, Excuse me for this One time; and if ever I invite you to
Dinner again, punish me with such another discourse, in the mean time let us go
in and dine, meat stays for us


Faith Madam, we were resolved to be merry; We have not met these three years
till to day, and at the Bear we meant to have dined; and since your Ladyship
would have Our Company, you must pardon Our humor; here Mistress Sadd, here is
the Widows health to you


NEphew, how do you dispose of your self this afternoon?


We have a design we must pursue, which will rid you of all this troublesome
Company; and we will make no Excuse, because you peeped into our privacies to day


Your humble servant, Ladies; Gentlemen, we will leave you to pursue your
fortunes


Farewell Widow, may thou live unmarryed till thou run'st away with thy self.


No, no, When that day comes, Command the humblest of your Servants.


Farewell Aunt; sweet Mistress Pleasant, I wish you good fortune.


Farewell, farewell Gentlemen; Niece, now if we could be rid of these troublesome
Lovers too, we would go see a Play


Rid of them? Why, they are but now in season; as I live,


I, but the world will talk, because they pretend; and then we shall be sure to
meet my Nephew there, and his wil'd Company, and they will laugh to see us
together


Who will you have? Tym the Butler, or Formal your Gentleman Usher? I would
take Philip the foreman of the shop as soon


Let Us mask our selves, and take Secret, and go alone by water.


Yes, and follow her like one of my Aunts of the Suburbs; it is a good way to
know what you may yield in a Market; for I Will undertake, there are those shall
bid for you before the play will be done


As I live, Madam, Mistress Pleasant is in the right; I had such a kindness
offered me once, and I came to a price with him in knavery; and hang me, if the
Rogue was not putting the earnest of his affection into my hand


Let Us go to the Glass-house then.


I Will go to a Play with my Servant, and so shall you; hang Opinion, and we will
go to the Glass-house afterward; it is too hot to Sup early


Pray Madam go, they say it is a fine Play, and a Knight writ it.


Pray let Secret prevail, I Will propose it to the Lovers; in the mean time go
you, and bid the Coachman make ready the Coach


Alas, Madam, he is sick, poor fellow, and gone to bed, he could not wait at
Dinner


Sick?


Why, see how all things work for the young men, either their Coach, or a Foot;
Mr. Constant, what think you of seeing a Play this afternoon? is it not too hot
to venture, this Infectious time


Fie, Madam, there is no danger, the Bill decreased Twenty last week.


I swear, they say, it is a very good Play to day.


Shall we go, Niece?


Faith it is hot, and there is no body but we.


Does that hinder? pray Madam, grudge us not the favor of venturing your self
in Our company


Come, leave this Ceremony, I Will go in, and put on my Mask; Secret shall bring
you yours


No, I Will go, and put it on within.


BY this day, you have netled the Widow.


The Captain neglected his dinner for his mirth, as if he had forgot to eat.


When did he oversee his drinking so?


Gentlemen, still it is my fortune to make your worships Merry.


As I live, Captain, I subscribe, and am content to hold my wit as Tenant to
thee; and to night I Will invite you to Supper, where it shall not be lawful to
speak till thou has victual'd thy Man of War


Shall's be merry? what shall we have?


Half a score dishes of meat, choose them your self.


Provide me then the Chines fried, and the Salmon Calver'd, a Carp, and black
sauce, Red-Dear in the blood, and an Assembly of Woodcocks, and Jack-snipes, so
fat you would think they had their winding Sheets on; And upon these, as their
Pages, let me have wait your Sussex Wheat-Ear, with a Feather in his Cap; Over
all which let our Countryman, General Chyne of Beef, Command: I hate your
French pottage, that looks as the Cook maid had more hand in it then the Cook


I Will promise you all this.


And let me alone to Cook the Fish.


You Cook it? No, no, I left an honest fellow in Town, when I went into Italy,
Signiour Ricardo Ligones, one of the ancient house of the Armenian
Ambassadors; if he be alive he shall be our Cook


Is he so Excellent at it?


Excellent? You shall try, you shall try; Why, I tell you, I saw him once dress
a shooing-horn, and a Joyners apron, that the Company left Pheasant for it


A Shooing-horn?


Yes, a shooing-horn; marry, there was Garlic in the Sauce.


Is this all you would have?


This, and a Bird of Paradise, to entertain the rest of the night, and let me
alone to Cook her


A Bird of Paradise, what is that?


A Girl of Fifteen, smooth as Satin, White as her Sunday Apron, Plump, and of
the first down: I Will take her with her guts in her Belly, and warm her with a
Country dance or two, then pluck her, and lay her dry betwixt a couple of
sheets; There pour into her so much oil of Wit as will make her turn to a man,
and stick into her heart three corns of whole love, to make her taste of what
she is doing, then having strewed a man all over her, shut the door, and leave
us, we will work our selves into such a Sauce as you can never surfeit on, so
Poynant and yet no Hogough; Take heed of a hogough, your Onion and woman make
the worst sauce; This shook together by an English Cook (for your French
seasoning spoils many a woman) and there is a Dish for a King


For the first Part, I Will undertake.


But this for Supper; Capt. No more of this now; This afternoon, as you are
true to the Pettycoat, observe your Instructions, and meet at Neds house in the
Evening


We will not fail.


I must write to Wanton, to know how things stand at home, and to acquaint her
how we have thrived with the Old Lady to day


Whither will you go to write?


To thy house, it is hard by, there is the Fleece.


Do, and in the mean time I Will go home and dispatch a little business, and meet
you


Make haste then.


Where shall I meet you?


Whither shall we go till it be time to attend the design.


Let Us go to Court for an hour.


Do, I Will meet you at the Queens side.


No, prithee, we are the Mounsieurs new come Over; and if we go fine they will
laugh at Us, and think we believe Our selves so; if not, then they will abuse
our clothes, and swear we went into France only to have our cloaks cut shorter


Will you go see a Play?


Do, and thither I Will come to you, if it be none of our Gentlemen Poets, that
excuse their writings with a Prologue that professes they are no Scholars


On my word this is held the best penned of the time, and he has writ a very
good Play; By this Day, it was extremely applauded


Does he write Plays by the day; Indeed a man would ha judged him a laboring
Poet


A Laboring Poet? by this hand he is a Knight; upon my recommendation venture
to see it; hang me if you be not extremely well satisfied


A Knight and write Plays? it may be, but it is strange to us; so they say
there are other Gentlemen Poets without Land or Latin; this was not ordinary;
prithee when was he knighted


In the North; the last great knighting, when 'twas Gods great Mercy we were
not all Knights


I Will swear, they say, there are Poets that have more Men in Liveries, then
Books in their studies


And what think you, Gentlemen, are not these things to start a Man? I believe
it is the first time you have found them lie at the sign of the Page, Footmen
and gilded Coaches; They were wont to lodge at the thin Cloak, they and their
Muses made up the Family; And thence sent Scenes to their Patrons, like Boys
in at windows, and one would return with a Dublett, another with a pair of
Breeches, a third with a little ready Money; which, together with their credit
with a company, in three Terms you rarely saw a Poet repaired


This truth no body denies.


Prithee let us resolve what we shall do, lest we meet with some of them: for
it seems they swarm, and I fear nothing like a Dedication, though it be but of
himself; For I must hear him say more then either I deserve or he believes; I
hate that in a Poet, they must be dull, or all upon all Subjects; so that they
can oblige none but their Muse


I perceive by this you will not see the Play; what think you of going to Sims,
to Bowls, till I come


Yes, if you will go to see that Comedy; but there is no reason we should pay
for our coming in, and Act too; like some whose interest in the Timber robs
them of their Reason, and they run as if they had stolen a Bias


Resolve what you will do, I am contented.


Let Us go walk in the Spring-garden.


I Will do it for Company, but I had as live be rid in the Horse-market, as walk
in that fools fair; where neither wit nor money is, nor sure to take up a
Wench; there is none but honest Women


A pox on it, what should we do there? let us go and cross the Field to Pikes,
her kitching is cool Winter and Summer


I like that motion well, but we have no time, and I hate to do that business
by half; after Supper, if you will, we'll go and make a night on it


Well, I must go write, therefore resolve of somewhat; shall I propose an
indifferent place where it is probable we shall all meet


Yes.


Go you before to the Devil, and I Will make haste after.


Agreed, we shall be sure of good Wine there and in Fresco, for he is never
without Patent snow


Patent snow, what does that project hold?


Yes, faith, and now there is a Commission appointed for Toasts against the
next Winter


Marry, they are wise, and foresaw the Parliament, and were resolved their
Monopolies should be no grievance to the People


Farewell, you will be sure to meet.


Yes, yes.


BId them ply him close and flatter him, and rail upon the old Lady and the
Captain; and, do you hear, give him some hints to begin the story of his life,
do it handsomely, and you shall see how the Sack will clip his tongue


I warrant you, I Will fit him.


When he is in his discourse, leave him and come down into the Parlour, and
steal away his box with the false Rings that stands by his bedside; I have all
his little Plate here already


Make you haste, I Will warrant you I Will dress him.


SIR, the Lady Love-all passed by even now.


The Lady Love-all? which way went she.


To the rich Lady the Widow, where your Worship dined.


It Is no matter; here, carry this Letter, and bring an answer to the Devil
quickly; and tell her we'll stay there till the time be fit for the design


JAck, How goes the world? Bring us some bottles of the best Wine.


You shall, Sir; your Worship is welcome into England.


Why look you, who says a Drawer can say nothing, but anan, anan, Sir? score a
quart of Sack in the half moon


Your Worship is merry; but I Will fetch you that, Sir, shall speak Greek, and
make your Worship prophecy, you drank none such in your journey


Do it then, and make a hole in this Angel thou may creep through; who is it
that peepes, a Fiddler? Bring him by the


A Tailor, an't like your Worship.


A Tailor? have thou a stout Faith?


I have had, an't like your Worship; But now I am in despair.


Why then thou art damned; go, go home, and throw thy self into thine own Hell,
it is the next way to the other


I hope your Worship is not displeased.


What do do here? a Tailor without faith, dos't come to take measure of ours?


No, I come to speak with one Master Jolly, a Courtier, a very fine spoken
Gentleman, and a just Compter, but one of the worst pay-masters in the world


As thou love me, let us keep him here till he comes, and make him valiant
with Sack that he may urge him till he beats


I Will charge him: Here drink, poor fellow, and stay in the next room till he
comes


I thank your Worship, but I am fasting; and if it please your Worship to call
for a dozen of Manchets that I may eat a crust first, then I Will make bold with
a glass of your Sack


Here, here, drink in the mean time, fetch him some bread.


Will your Worship have me drink all this vessel of Sack?


Yes, yes, off with it, 'twill do you no harm.


Why do you not take some Order with that Jolly to make him pay thee?


I have petitioned him often, but can do no good.


A pox upon him, petition him, his heart is hardened to ill, threaten to arrest
him; nothing but Sergeant can touch his Conscience


Truly, Gentlemen, I have reason to be angry, for he uses me ill, when I ask
him for my money.


Where is Master VVild, and Master Careless?


I hear his voice.


Let the Coach stay. How now, who would he speak with?


Do not you know?


Yes, and be you Judge if the Rogue does not suffer deservedly; I have bid him
any time this twelve month but send his wife, and I Will pay her, and the Rogue
replies, no body shall lie with his wife but himself


Nay, if you be such a one.


No more they shall not, I am but a poor man.


By this hand, he is drunk.


Nay then, I arrest you in mine own Name at his Majesty's Suit.


As I live, thou shall not beat him.


Beat him? I Will kiss him, I Will pay him, and carry him about with me, and be at
the charge of Sack to keep him in the humor


Help, rescue, I Will have his body, no Bail shall serve.


Sir, yonder is a Gentleman would speak with you; I do not like his followers.


What are they, Bailiffs?


Little better.


Send him up alone, and stand you ready at the Stairs feet.


How can that be?


It is the Scrivener at the Corner, pick a Quarrel with him for coming into our
Company; the Drawers will be armed behind them, and we will so rout the
Rascals; take your swords, and let him sleep


What Scrivener?


Cropp the Brownist, he that the Ballad was made on.


What Ballad?


Have not you heard of the Scriveners Wife that brought the Black-moore from
the holy Land, and made him a Brownist; and in pure charity lay with him, and
was delivered of a Mag-Pie; a pied Prophet; which when the elect saw, they
prophesi'd, if it lived, 'twould prove a great enemy to their Sect; for the
Midwife cried out, 'twas born a Bishop, with Tippet and white-sleeves; at
which the zealous Mother cried, Down with the Idol; so the Midwife and she in
pure devotion killed it


Killed it? what became of them?


Why, they were taken and condemned, and suffered under a Catholic Sheriff,
that afflicted them with the Letany all the way from Newgate to the Gallows,
which in Rog'ry he made to be set up Altar-wise too, and hanged them without a
Psalm


But how took they that breach of Privilege?


I know not, Gregory turned them off, and so they descended, and became
Brown-martyrs


And is the husband at door now?


Yes, yes, but he is married again to a rich Widow at Wapping, a Wench of
another temper, one that you cannot please better then by abusing him; I always
pick quarrels with him, that she may reconcile us, the peace is always worth a
dinner, at least. Hark, I hear him. -- Save you Mr. Cropp, you are come in the
nick to pledge a health


No, Sir, I have other business, shall I be paid my money, or no?


Yes.


Sir?


You asked whether you should be paid your money, or no, and I said, Yes.


Pray, Sir, be plain.


And be you so, Sir; how durst you come into this Room, and company, without
leave


Sir, I have come into good Lords company, er'e now.


It may be so, but you shall either fall upon your knees, and pledge this
health, or you come no more into Lords companies, no, By these hilts


It Is Idolatry; Do, martyr me, I will not kneel, nor join


Either kneel, or I Will tear thy Cloak, which by the age and looks, may be that
which was writ for in the time of the Primitive Church


Pay me, and I Will wear a better; it would be honestlier done, then to abuse
this, and profane the Text; a Text that shows your Bishops in those days wore
no Lawn-sleeves; and you may be ashamed to protect him that will not pay his
debts; The cries of the Widow will come against you for it


Remember, Sirrah, the dinners and suppers, fat Venison and good words, I was
fain to give you, Christning your Children still, by the way of Brokadge; count
that charge, and how often I have kept you from fining for Sheriff, and thou
art in my debt; then I am damned for speaking well of thee so often against my
conscience, which you never consider


I am an honest man, Sir.


Then ushering your wife, and Mistress Ugly her daughter, to Plays and Masks
at Court; you think these courtesies deserve nothing in the hundred; it is true,
they made room for themselves with their dagger Elbows; and when Spider your
daughter laid about her with her breath, the Devil would not have sat near her


You did not borrow my money with this language.


No, Sirrah; then I was fain to flatter you, and endure the familiarity of your
family, and hear (nay fain sometimes to join in) the lying praises of the holy
Sister that expired at Tyburn


Do, abuse her, and be cursed; it is well known she died a


Ar't serious? By that light, I Will consent, and take it for an infinite
Obligation if thou will teach the rest of my Creditors that trick; 'twill save
me a world of labor; For, hang me if I know how to do it


Well, Sir, since I see your resolution, I shall make it my business.


Prithee, let us be rid of this fool.


Fool? let him pay the fool his money, and he will be gone.


No, Sir, not a farthing; 'twas my business to borrow it, and it shall be yours
to get it in again; nay, By this hand, I Will be feasted too, and have good
words; nay, thou shall lend me more er'e thou get'st this again


I Will lay my Action upon you.


Your Action you Rogue, lay two.


Lay three for Battery; What have we here? a she Creditor too? who would she
speak with


She looks as if she had trusted in her time.


Would you speak with any here, old Gentlewoman?


My business is to Mr. Jolly.


From your self, or are you but a Messenger?


My business, Sir, is from a Lady.


From a Lady? from what Lady, pray? Why so coy?


From a Lady in the Town.


Hoh! hoh! from a Lady in the Town; Is it possible I should have guest you came
from a Lady in the Suburbs, or some Country-madam, by your riding face


I think we have routed the Rascals. Faithful? what makes thy gravity in a
Tavern


Sport, it seems, for your saucy companions.


Ho, ho, Mull, ho; No Fury, Faithful.


It Is well, Sir; my Lady presents her service to you, and has sent you a
Letter, there is my business


Prithee, who is her Lady?


The Lady Love-all.


Oh, oh, does she serve that old Lady? God help her.


God help her: Pray for your self, Sir, my Lady scorns your prayers.


Faithful, come hither; Prithee is thy Lady drunk?


Drunk, Sir?


I, drunk, or mad, she would never writ this else; she requires me, here, to send
back by you the Pearl she gave me this morning; which sure she would never do if
she were sober; for you know, I earned them hard


I know? What do I know? you will not defame my Lady, will you?


By no means, this is by way of counsel; fie, give a thing, and take a thing;
if he did not perform, he shall come at night, and pay his scores


It Is well, Sir; is this your return for my Ladies Favors? shall I have the
Pearl, Sir


No; and tell her it is the opinion of us all, he that opens her stinking Oyster
is worthy of the Pearl


You are a foul-mouthed fellow, Sirrah; and I shall live to see you load a
Gallows, when my Lady shall find the way to her own again


If she miss, there are diverse can direct her, you know; adieu, Faithful, do
you hear? steal privately down by the backdoor, lest some knavish Boy spy
thee, and call thine age, Baud


Prithee, who is this thing?


It Is my Ladies Waiting Woman, her Baud, her she Confesfor, her self at second
hand; her beginning was simple and below stairs, till her Lady finding her to
be a likely promising Baud; secret as the Key at her Girdle, obedient as her
thoughts, those virtues raised her from the flat Peti-coat, and Kercher, to the
Gorget and Bum-roll; and I remember 'twas good; sport at first, to see the
Wench perp! ext with her Metamorphosis; she since has been in love with all the
Family, and now sighs after the Levite; and if he forsake her too, I prophecy,
a Waiting-womans curse will fall upon her, to dye old, despised, poor, and out
of fashion


Why do you not hang out a painted cloth? and take two pence a piece, and let
in all the tame fools at door, those sons of wonder that now gape, and think
you mad


It Is no matter what they think, madness is proper here; are not Taverns
Bacchus his Temples, the place of madness, Does not the sign of madness hang
out at the door


While we within possess our joys and cups, as full of pleasure as weeping
Niobe's afflicted eyes were swelled with grief and tears; Blessing on the cause
that made our joys thus complete; for see Plutus in our Pockets, Mars by our
sides, Bacchus in our head, self-love in our hearts, and change of Virgins in
our Arms, Beauties whose eyes and hearts speak love and welcome; No rigid
thinkers, no niggard beauties that maliciously rake up their fire in green
sickness to preserve a spark that shall flame only in some dull day of
Marriage; let such swear and forswear, till (of the whole Parish) they love
each other least, whilst we wisely set out our cobwebs in the most perspicuous
places to catch these foolish flies


He Is in the right; do think we retreated hither to beat a bargain for a
score of Sheep, or dispute the legality of Votes, and weigh the power of
Prerogative and Parliament, and club for concluding Sack, or read the Fathers
here, till we grow costive, like those that have worn their suffering Elbows
bare, to find a knowledge to perplex'em? A pox on such brain-breaking thoughts;
avoid them, and take with me into thy hand a glass of eternal Sack, and
prophecy the restoration of senses, and the fall of a Lover from grace, which
our dear friend, Mr. Jolly, will prove to whom the Lady Love-all (by Faithful
lately departed) sent for the Pearl you wot of


But, I hope, he had the grace to keep them.


No, no; I Am a fool, I.


Was not my Boy here?


No, we saw him not.


A pox of the Rogue, he is grown so lasie.


Your Boy is come in just now, and called for the key of the backdoor, there is
women with him


Oh! that is well, it is Wanton; I sent for her, to laugh over the story of the
old Lady and her Pearl; where have you been all this while, Sirrah


I could overtake the Coach, Sir, no sooner.


The Coach? what Coach?


The Lady Love-alls.


The Lady Love-alls? why what had you to do with her Coach?


I went to give her the Letter your worship sent her.


The Letter? what Letter?


That your worship gave me.


That I writ, at Neds house, to Wanton?


The Letter you gave me, Sir, was directed to the Lady Love-all, and she
stormed like a mad-woman at the reading of it


Why, thou will not beat the Boy for thy own fault? what Letter was it?


'Twas enough, only a relation of the Pearl, wherein she finds her self
sufficiently abused to Wanton


Now, Gentlemen, you have two to laugh at.


A pox of fooling, let us resolve what to do, there is no denying, for she has
all the particulars under my hand


You must resolve of something, for she is coming, and stayed only till the
backdoor was opened


How did she know I was here?


Your worship bad me tell her, you would stay here for her.


How came this mistake?


Why, the Devil ought us a shame it seems. You know I went home to give Wanton
an account how we advanced in our design; and when I was writing the
superscription, I remember the Boy came in and told me the Lady Love-all passed
by


And so, it seems, you in pure mistake directed your Letter to her.


Well, resolve what you will do with her, when she comes.


Faith, bear it like men, it is but an old Lady lost; lets resolve to defy her,
we are sure of our Pearl; but lest we prolong the war, take the first occasion
you can all to avoid the room; when she is alone, I Will try whether she will listen
to a composition


Have you no friends in the close Committee?


Yes, yes, I am an Essex man.


Then get some of them to move, it may be voted no Letter.


I, I; and after it is voted no Letter, then vote it false, scandalous and
illegal, and that is in it; they have a president for it in the Danish packet,
which they took from a foolish fellow, who presuming upon the Law of Nations,
came upon an Embassy to the King without an Order, or Pass from both houses


Hark, I hear her coming.


Sir, I received a Letter, but by what accident I know not; for I believe it
was not intended me, though the contents concern me


Madam, it is too late to deny it; is it peace or war you bring? without
dispute, if war, I hang out my defiance; if peace, I yield my weapon into your
hands


Are you all unworthy? your whole sex falsehood? is it not possible to oblige a
man to be loyal? this is such a treachery no age can match; apply your self
with youth and wit to gain a Ladies love and friendship only to betray it? was
it not enough you commanded my fortune, but you must wrack my honor too, and
instead of being grateful for that charity which still assisted your wants,
strive to pay men with injuries, and attempt to make the world believe I pay to
lose my fame? and then make me the


Yea, Sir; and you that had such a ready wit to proclaim my Lady, Whore and me
Baud, I hope to see you load a Gallows for it


Once again, is it peace or war?


Peace? I Will have thy blood first, Dog; where is my Pearl? -- You ought to right
me, Sir, in this particular; it was to you I


Madam, I sent not for them.


No more words; I have them, I earned them, and you paid them.


You are a foul-mouthed fellow, Sirrah.


Peace, Wench, I scorn their slander, it cannot shake my honor; it is too
weighty and too fixed for their calumny


I Will be sworn for my part on it, I think it is a great honor; I am sure I had
as much as I could carry away in ten nights, and yet there was no miss on it


You? I think so; there is no mark of my work, you see, and yet I came after
thee, and brought away loads would have sunk a Sedan-man


By this relation she should be a woman of a great fame.


Let that consideration, with her condition, and her age, move some reverence,
at least to what she was; Madam, I am sorry I cannot serve you in this
particular


I see all your mean baseness, pursue your scorn; Come, let us go, Wench, I
shall find some to right my fame; and though I have lost my opinion, I have
gained a knowledge how to distinguish of Love hereafter; and I shall scorn you
and all your Sex, that have not Soul enough to value a noble Friendship


Pray, Madam, let me speak with you.


We'll have no whispering; I said it, and I Will maintain it with my sword.


Sir, there is one without would speak with you?


With me?


No, Sir, with Master Wild.


Madam, I Will wait upon you presently.


Madam, I know my Company is displeasing to you, therefore I Will take my leave;
Drawer, show me another Room?


Oh Faithful, Faithful; I am most miserably abused, and can find no way to my
Revenge


Madam, I Will give them Rats-bane, and speedily too, ere they can tell; for that
Rascal the Captain has a Tongue else, will proclaim you, and undo your Fame
for ever


I, I, my Fame, my Fame, Faithful; and if it were not for mine Honor, (which
I have kept unstained to this minute) I would not care


This it is; you will still set your affection upon every young thing; I could
but tell you on it


Who could have suspected they would have been so false in their Loves to me
that have been so faithful to them. -- Honest Friend, where is Master Wild


The other Gentlemen carried him away with them?


Are they all gone then?


Yes, by this hand; These Gentlemen are quickly satisfied; what an ugly Whore
they have got! how she states it!


Come, let us go Wench.


Mistress, who pays the reckoning?


What says he?


He asks me, who pays the reckoning?


Who pays the reckoning? why, what have we to do with the reckoning?


Shut the door, Dick, we'll have the reckoning before you go.


Why, good man sawce-box, you will not make my Lady pay for their reckoning,
will you


My Lady? a pox of her Title, she would need of something to make her pass.


What do you say, Sirrah?


I say, the Gentlemen paid well for their sport; and I know no reason why we
should lose our reckoning


What do you take me for, my Friend?


In troth, I take you for nothing; but I would be loath to take you for that
use I think they made shift with you for


Madam, this is that Rascally Captains plot.


Patience, Patience, oh for a bite at the slaves heart. Friend, mistake me not,
my name is Love-all, a Lady; send one along with me and you shall have your
money


You must pardon me, Madam, I am but a Servant; if you be a Lady pray sit in an
Inner Room, and send home your Woman for the money; The sum is six pounds, and
be pleased to remember the Waiters


Go Faithful, go fetch the money; Oh Revenge, Revenge: shall I lose my Honor,
and have no Revenge


BY all that a longing Bride hopes for, which I am not, I am better pleased
with this Revenge then mine own plot, which takes as I could wish; I have so
anointed my high Priests with Sack, that he would have confuted Baal's Priest;
and now he does so slumber in his Ale, and calls to bed already, swears the
Sun is set


Faith, Wench, her abusing of me made me leave her for the Reckoning.


Yes, faith, they have treated her upsey Whore lain with her, told, and then
pawned her


Yes, yes, you are fine things; I wonder Women, can endure you; for me, I
expect you worse, and am armed for it


Faith let us send and release her, the jest is gone far enough; as I live, I
pity her


Pity her? hang her, and rid the Country of her, she is a thing wears out her
limbs as fast as her clothes, one that never goes to bed at all, nor sleeps
in a whole skin, but is taken to pieces like a Motion, as if she were too long;
she should be hanged for offering to be a Whore


As I live, she is in the right; I peeped once to see what she did before she
went to bed; By this light, her Maids were dissecting her; and when they had
done, they brought some of her to bed, and the rest they either pined or hung
up, and so she lay dismembered till Morning; in which time, her Chamber was
strewn all over, like an Anatomy School


And when she travels any where she is transported with as great a care, and
fear of spoiling, as a Juglers Motion, when he removes from Fair to Fair


She is a right broken Gamester, who, though she lacks wherewithal to play,
yet loves to be looking on


He is awake, and calls for you impatiently, he would fain be in Bed, the
Company is all gone


Are you instructed?


Let me alone, I Will warrant you for my part.


Farewell then, you are all ready; who plays Master Constable?


I, I; and Ned Jolly the sumner.


Farewell, farewell then.


It is a delicate wench.


She has excellent flesh, and a fine face; by this light, we Captain from his
reign here


I like her shrewdly; I hate a wench that is all Whore and no Company; This is
a Comedy all day, and a Fair at night


I hope to exalt the Parsons horn here.


And what think you? is it not a sweet sin, this lying with another man's Wife?


Is Jolly come


No, but he will be here instantly.


Is he a bed?


Yes, yes, and he sleeps as if he had been put to bed by his Sexton, with dust
to dust, and ashes to ashes


And we'll wake him with that shall be as terrible to him as the latter day.


Let him sleep a while that he may be fresh, else the Jest is spoiled; for it
is his sense of his disgrace must work my Ends


I Will go home then, and get supper ready, and expect you.


Do, Our Scene lies here; Who Is there, Jolly?


Yes.


Are you fitted?


Yes, I have got the Blackfriars Music; I was fain to stay till the last Act;
and who do you think I saw there


I know not.


Guess.


Prithee, I cannot guess.


Your Aunt and Mistress Pleasant, and trusty Secret.


What man?


The Lovers only, so close in a Box!


It will be a match, and there is an End; prithee let them go to it; what is it to
Us, let us mind our business now, and think on them hereafter


A pox upon them for a couple of Stauk-hounds; have they killed at last? Why,
this is Fools fortune; it would be long enough ere one that has wit got such a
wife


No more of this now; have you borrowed the watchmens Coats?


Yes, and Bills, Beards, and Constables staff, and Lanthorn; and let me alone
to fit him, for the Summer; But when this is done I expect my Fee, a Tithe
Night at least; Wanton, I will lie with thee for thy Roguery; what are you
dumb, you will not refuse me, I hope


Not, if I thought thou desiredst it; but I hate to have it desired
indifferently, and but so so done neither when it is done


I hope you will not disgrace my work, will you?


Faith, they say thy pleasure lies in thy Tongue; and therefore, Though I do
not give thee leave to lie with me, yet I will give thee as good a thing that
will please thee as well


Some Roguery I expected.


No Faith, I am serious; and because I will please you both, Master Wild shall
lie here, and you shall have leave to say you do, which will please you as well


Faith, and my part is some pleasure, else, I have loved, enjoyed, and told, is
mistook


I, but never to love, seldom enjoy, and always tell? Faugh, it stinks, and
stains worse then Shoreditch dirt, and women hate and dread men for it; Why, I
that am a whore professed cannot see you, he digest it, though it be my Profit
and Interest. For to be a private whore in this Town starves in the nest like
young Birds when the old one's killed


Excellent Girl, it is too true Jolly; your tongue has kept, many a woman honest.


Faith, it is a truth, this I shall say, you may all better your pleasures by,
if you will observe it; I dare say, the fear of telling keeps more women honest
then Bridewell Hemp; And were you wise men, and true Lovers of liberty, now
were the time to bring wenching to that perfection no age could ever have
hoped; now you may sow such seed of pleasure, you may be prayed for hereafter;
Now, in this Age of zeal and Ignorance, would I have you four, in old clothes,
and demure looks, present a Petition to both Houses, and say, you are men
touched in Conscience for your share in that wicked ness which is known to
their worships by the pleasure of Adultery, and desire it may be death, and
that a Law may be passed to that purpose; How the women will pray for you, and
at their own charges rear Statu's in memory of their Benefactors; the young and
kind would then haunt your Chambers, Pray, and present you, and Court the
Sanguine youth, for the sweet sin secured by such a Law; None would lose an
Occasion, nor churlishly oppose kind Nature, nor refuse to listen to her
summons, when youth and Passion calls for those forbidden sweets; when such
security as your lives are at stake, who would fear to trust; with this Law all
Oaths and Protestations are cancelled; Letters and Bawdes would grow useless
too; By instinct the Kind will find the Kind; and having one nature become of
one mind; Now we lose an Age, to observe and know a man's humor, ere we dare
trust him; But get this Law, then it is, like and enjoy; and whereas now, with
expense of time and Fortune, you may glean some one Mistress amongst your
neighbors wives, you shall reap women whole Armfulls as in the Common field;
there is one small Town, wise only in this Law; and I have heard them say,
that know it well, There has been but one Execution this hundred years; yet the
same party searched seven years, and could not find an honest woman in the Town


An Excellent Plot, let us about it; Ink and Paper, dear Wanton, we will draw
the Petition presently


Will Master Jolly consent too? You must not then, as soon as a handsome woman
is named, smile, and stroke your Beard, tell him that is next you, you have
layen with her; such a lie is as dangerous as a truth, and 'twere but Justice
to have thee hanged for a sin thou never commitedst, for having defamed so many
women


If all those Liars were hanged, I believe the scale would weigh down the
guilty


One Rogue hanged, for Example, would make a thousand kind Girls: If it take it
shall be called my Law, Wanton's Law; Then we may go in Pettycoats again, for
women grew imperious and wore the Breeches, only to fright the poor cuckolds,
and make the Fools digest their Horns -- Are you all ready, shall I open the
door


Yes.


I Will expect you at my house.


We Will come, we will come.


So, knock louder.


Who Is there? what would you have?


Here Is his Majesty's Watch, and Master Constables Worship must come in; We
have a warrant from the Lords to search for a Delinquent


You come not here, I Will answer your warrant to morrow.


Break open the door.


I would you durst.


Lord! Dear what shall we do?


Why, sweet, I Will warrant you, art thou not my wife, my Rib, bone of my bone?
I Will suffer any thing ere one hair of thee shall be touched


Hark, they break open the door.


They dare not; why do thou tremble so? alas, sweet Innocence, how it shakes?


Break open the door.


I Will complain to the Bishop of this Insolence.


They come, they come, Lamb.


No matter sweet; They dare not touch thee; what would


Read our Warrant, and our business will excuse us? do you know any such person
as you find there


Yes, Sir, but not by this name; such a woman is my wife, and no Lindabrides;
we were married to day, and I Will justify her my wife the next Court day; you
have your answer, and may be gone


We must take no notice of such Excuses now; if she be your wife, make it
appear in Court, and she will be delivered unto you


If she be my wife Sir? I have wedded her and Bedded her, what other Ceremonies
would you have? Be not afraid, sweet heart


Sir, We can do no less then Execute our Warrant; we are but Servants; And,
Master Constable, I charge you in the Kings Name to do your Duty; behold the
body of the Delinquent


Touch her that dares; I Will put my Dagger in him, fear


Help, my dearest, will you let me be haled thus?


Villains, what will you do? Murder, Rape.


Yes, yes, it is likely; I look like a Ravisher.


Hold him, and we will do well enough with her.


What have we here, an old woman?


Let me go, slaves and Murderers.


Let him go.


Do any of you know this woman? this is not she we looked for.


No? Rascal, that mistake shall not excuse you.


It is old Goodman what do you call him? his wife.


Hold the Candle, and let us see her face.


What have were here, Adultery? take them both, here will be new matter.


Master Constable, a little Argument will persuade you to believe I am grossly
abused; sure this does not look like a piece that a man would sin to enjoy, let
that then move your Pity, and care of my Reputation; consider my calling, and
do not bring me to a public shame for what you're sure I am not guilty of, but
by plot of some Villains


Dear, will you disclaim me now?


Oh, Impudence!


Master Constable, do your duty; take them both away, as you will answer it.


Give him his Cassock, to cover him.


Why Gentlemen, whither will you carry me?


To the next Justice, I think it is Master Wild, he is newly come from travel,
it will be a good way, Neighbors, to express our Respects to him


No faith, Gentlemen, e'ne go the next way to Tybourn, and dispatch the
business without Ceremony, for yee'll utterly disgrace me; this is that damned
Captain; My wife is abroad too, I fear she is of the Plot


Come, away with them.


Whither will they lead us, Dear?


Oh, oh, Impudence! Gentlemen, do not lead us together I beseech you.


Come, come, lead them together, no Ceremony's; your faults are both alike.


YOu had best brag now, and use me like my Lady what'st ye call; But if you do
I care not


Come, you are a Fool, I Will be a faithful Friend, and make good conditions for
thee before thy husband be quit


You must do it now or never.


Hark, hark, I hear them -- What Is the news?


We have brought a Couple of Delinquents before your Worship, they have
committed a very foul fault


And we have brought the fault along too, that your Worship may see it, you
will be the better able to judge of the offenders


Ha! What do I see? my wife in Master Justices Lap?


What has the poor fellow done?


Why Madam, he has been taken a Bed with this woman, another man's wife.


In bed with her? and do you raise him to punish him? Master Constable, if you
would afflict him, Command them to lie together again; Is not the man mad


This is fine Roguery, I find who rules the roast.


Well, to the business; you say, he was taken in bed with another man's wife.


Yes, and't like your Worship.


Make his Mittimus to the Hole at Newgate.


Sure I have seen this Fellows face. -- Friend, have I never seen your face
before


If I mistake not, I have seen one very like your Ladyships too, she was a
Captains cast-whore in the Town. I shall have a time to be revenged


How now, Sirrah? are you threatening? away with him.


I Will fetch a stronger Watch, Sir, and return presently.


Do, Master Constable, and give the poor Woman something, and set her free; for
I dare say 'twas his wickedness, she looks like one that never thought on such
a thing


God bless your Worship, I am innocent; he never left making Love till I
consented


Oh miserable! miserable!


How now, what is the news here? my honored Friend, and Master Parson, what
makes you here at this time of night? Why I should have thought this a time to
have envied you for your fair Brides embraces, do you give these favors? are
these your Bride-laces? It Is a new way.


Is it new to you?


How now Captain?


Wanton, is this your plot to endear your Husband to you?


No, it is thy plot, poor beaten Captain, but I shall be revenged.


Yes, faith, it was my plot, and I glory in it, to undermine my Machiavell,
which so greedily swallowed that sweet bait that had this hook


It Is well.


But my anger ends not here. Remember the base language you gave me, Son of a
thousand Fathers, Captain of a tame band, and one that got my living by the
long staffe-speeches; for which, and thy former Treacheries, I Will ruin thee,
Slave; I Will have no more Mercy on thee, then old women on blind puppies; I Will
bring you to your Commendations in Latin Epistles again, nor leave thee any
thing to live on, no, not Bread, but what thou earn'st by raking Gentlewomens
names in Anagrams; and Master Justice, if ever you will oblige me, stand to me
now, that I may procure the whipping of him from the Reverend Bench


I am undone.


I can do nothing but Justice, you must excuse me; I shall only make it appear
how fit it is to punish this kind of sin in that Coat in time, and to crush
such serpents in the shells


Mercy, Oh Mercy!


Officers, away with him.


No Mercy?


Yes, upon Conditions there may be some Mercy.


And these they are -- let the watch stay in the the other Room. -- First, your
Wife shall have her liberty, and you yours, as she reports of you; and when you
bring her with you, you shall be welcome; then you shall not be jealous, that is
another point


That he shall have a Cure for --


Yes, yes, I Will apply something to his Eyes shall cure him of his doubt.


Then you shall ask the Captain pardon and your Wife; to him you shall allow
half your Parsonage to maintain her; The Deeds are ready within; if you will
sign them, and deliver your Wife to our use, she shall discharge you


I submit, Sir, But I hope your Worship will desire no witness to the use of my
Wife; The Sumner and the Watch too; I hope your Worship will enjoin them
silence


You shall not need to fear, I Will have a Care of your Credit;


Ha! abused?


Nay, no flinching, if you do, I betake me to Master Sumner again.


And I become severe Master Constable in a trice.


No, no, I submit, and I hope we are all Friends; I Am sure I have the hardest
part, to forgive


And I, before all this Company, promise to forget and forgive thee, and am
content to take thee again for my dear and mortal Husband, now you are tame;
but you must see you do so no more, and give your self to be blind; when it is
not fit for you to see; and practice to be deaf; and learn to sleep in time,
and find business to call you away when Gentlemen come that would be private


Why so, now things are as they should be; and when you will obey, you shall
command: But when you would be imperious, then I betake me to my Constables
Staff 'till you subscribe. Cedunt Armis Togae; and if it be false Latin,
Parson, you must pardon that too


By this hand, I must have my Tythe-night with thee; thou art such a wag; say,
when? when will thou give me leave? ha


Never.


Never?


No, never.


D' ye hear, I am none of them that work for Charity; either resolve to pay, or
I kick down all my Milk again


What would you have?


Give me leave to lie with you.


No indeed.


No?


No; but rather then quarrel, as I said before, I will give you leave to say
you have lain with me


I am of opinion she owes you nothing now, so Mistress Wanton, take your
Husband; and to remove all doubts, this night I Will be at the charge of a Wed
ding supper


This is better then Newgate hole yet, Bridewell Hemp, brown bread and
whip-cord


BY my troth, is was a good Play.


And I am glad I am come home, for I am en'e as weary with this walking; For
Gods sake whereabouts does the pleasure of walking lie? I swear, I have often
sought it till I was weary, and yet I could never find it.


What do these Halberds at your door?


Halberds, where?


There, at your Lodging.


Friend, what would those Watchmen have?


The house is shut up for the sickness this afternoon.


The sickness?


Yes forsooth, there is a Coachman dead full of the Tokens.


Where is the Officer?


He is gone to seek the Lady of the House, and some other Company that dined
here yesterday, to bring her in, or carry her to the Pesthouse


Ha! What shall we do, Niece?


If you please to command our Lodging.


It will be too much trouble.


Let Us go to Love-all's.


Not I, by my Faith; it is scarce for our Credits to let her come to us.


Why? is she naught?


Faith, Madam, her Reputation is not good.


But what shall we do then?


Dare you adventure to oblige us?


Thank you Sir, We'll go to my Nephews at Covent Garden; he may shift among his
acquaintance


It was well thought on, the Piazza is hard by too.


We'll borrow your Coach thither, and we'll send it you back again strait.


We'll wait upon you, Madam.


This accident troubles me; I am heartily sorry for the poor Fellow.


I am sorry too; but pray, Aunt, let us not forget our selves in our grief; I
am not ambitious of a Red-cross upon the door


Mistress Pleasant is in the right; for if you stay the Officers will put you
in


We shall trouble you, Sir, for your Coach.


I Am reconciled; and will no longer be an uncharitable Churchman; I think
this sack is a cooler


What? does it make you to see your error?


Yes, and consider my man of war; nor will I again dispute his Letters of Mart,
nor call them Passes for Pirates; I am free


And welcome, any thing but anger is sufferable, and all is jest when you
laugh; and I will hug thee for abusing me with thy eyes in their scabbards; but
when you rail with drawn eyes, red and naked, threatening a Levites second
revenge to all that touches your Concubine, then I betake me to a
dark-lanthorn, and a Constables-staff, and by help of these Fathers whom I cite
I prove my Text, women that are kind ought to be free


But Captain, is it not lawful for us Shepherds to reclaim them?


A mere mistake; for sin like the Sea may be turned out, but will never grow
less; and though you should drain this Mistress Doll, yet the Whore will find a
place, and perhaps overflow some Maid, till then honest; and so you prove the
author of a new sin, and the defiler of a pure Temple; therefore I say, while
you live, let the Whore alone till she wears out; nor is it safe to vamp them,
as you shall find, read Ball the first and the second


No more discourse. Strike up Fiddlers.


See, who is that knocks?


Sir, it is Mistress Pleasant, and the two Gentlemen that dined there to day.


My Aunt, and Mistress Pleasant.


What a pox makes them abroad at this time of night?


It may be, they have been a wenching.


Sir, they were upon alighting out of the Coach when I came up.


Quickly, Mrs. Wanton, you and your husband to bed, there is the Key; Mr.
Parson, you know the way to the old Chamber, and to it quickly, all is friends
now


Sweet heart, we will steal away.


The Devil on them, they have spoyld our mirth.


Jack, get you and your company down the back-way into the Kitchen, and stay
there till we see what this Visit means


Means! What should it mean? it is nothing but the mischievous Nature all
honest Women are endu'd with, and naturally given to spoil sport: I wonder what
Fart blew them hither to night


Nay, have a little patience, Captain; you and Mr. Jolly must sit quietly a
while within, till we know the cause


It is but deferring our mirth for an hour, or so. Servant. Sir, here is my Lady.


Quickly remove those things there: Captain, step in there. --


Nephew, do you not wonder to see me here, at this time of night?


I know it is not ordinary, therefore I believe it is some design: what is it,
Mrs. Pleasant? Shall I make one


As I live, Sir, pure necessity; neither mirth nor kindness has begot this
Visit


What, is your Coach broke?


Faith, Nephew, the truth is, the Sickness is in my house, and my Coachman
died since Dinner


The Sickness?


I, as I live, we have been walking since the Play; and when we came home we
found the Watch at the door, and the house shut up


And a Constable gone in search of all those that dined there to day, with
order to furnish us lodgings in the Pesthouse


Are you not afraid to receive us?


As I live, the accident troubles me; and I am sorry such a misfortune should
beget me this favor; and I could wish my self free from the honor, if the
cause were removed too


As I live, Mr. Wild, I must have been forced to have lain with my servant to
night, if you had not received me


If I thought so, I would carry you out in my arms, I am so much Mr. Constant's
friend


But are you more his friend then mine, Mr. Wild?


No, but I presume by this he has gained so much interest as he would not be
very displeasing to you


Oh! your humble servant, Sir.


If I had had a mind to that lodging, I had never come hither; for when I have
a mind to it, I Will marry without dispute; for I fear no body so much as a
husband; and when I can conquer that doubt, I Will marry at a minutes warning


No dispute now, can you furnish us with a couple of Beds?


Yes, yes.


And have you er'e a woman in the house?


My Sisters Maid is here.


Madam, if you resolve to do us this honor, you shall find clean linen, and
your Beds quickly ready


But where will my Nephew and you, Sir, lie to night?


Oh, Madam, we have acquaintance enough in the Town.


Well, Sir, we will accept this courtesy; and when you come into Suffolk you
shall command my house


Prithee call Bess, and bid her bring sheets to make the Bed; I Will go and fetch
in a Pallet, it is as good a Bed as the other, and if you will stay the
removing, we will set up a Bed-stead


No, a Pallet, pray; but what shall we do for night clothes, Aunt?


Why, what are those you bought my Sisters?


Is not that Linen gone yet?


No faith, Madam, his man forgot it, till the Carriers were gone last week.


Will that serve?


Yes, yes, pray do us the favor to let us have it, it is but washing often again.


Nay, if it will serve, discourse no more; I Will fetch the bundle; and prithee
fetch the Combs and Looking glasses I bought the other day; for other
necessaries that want a name the wench shall furnish you with


Nay, but where is she, Nephew?


I Will call her, if she be not gone to Bed; it is an ignorant young thing, I am
to send her to my Sisters in the Country; I have had such ado to put her in the
Fashion


What Country is she? Prithee, Mr. Wild, let us see her.


I Will call her down.


Madam, now we see you are safe we will kiss your hands, and wait upon you to morrow.


It must be early then, Sir; for I shall borrow my Nephews Coach, and be gone
betimes into the Country to take a little fresh Air, and prevent the search


Pray, Madam, be pleased to command ours.


No, Sir, I humbly thank you; my Nephew's will hold our company.


Your humble servant, Mistress Pleasant.


Your servant, Madam.


Good night, Mr. Constant.


Sir, you will excuse us, we have no body here to light you down.


Madam, I am here your servant as much as those that wear your Livery; and this
house holds no other; we can be civil, Madam, as well as extravagant


Your humble servant, Mr. Careless.


Gentlemen, if you will wait on my Lady to her Chamber, then I Will wait upon you
down


You oblige us, Sir.


THe Plague?


The Plague; As I live, and all my relation is truth, every syllable; But, Mrs.
Wanton, now must you play your masterpiece; be sure to blush, and appear but
simple enough, and all is well; thou will pass for as arrant a Chambermaid as
any is in the Parish


Hum! new Plots?


Let me put on a Petti-coat and a Muffler, and I Will so Chambermaid it, and be
so diligent with the clean Smock and the Chamber Pot: now would I give all the
Shoes in my Shop to lie with 'em both


Let me alone to fit them, I can make a scurvey Curt'sie naturally; remember, I
am an Essex woman, if they ask


Come, come quickly, take those Sweetmeats; bring the great Cake and Knife,
and Napkins, for they have not supped; and Captain, make some Lemonade, and
send it by the Boy to my Chamber; and do you hear, Jolly, you must stay till we
come, for we must lie with you to night


We Will stay, but make haste then.


And bring our Cloaks and Swords out with you.


I will, I will; but be quiet all.


Mr. Wild, I hope there is no Plot in this.


There Is no jealousy, Mr. Parson; it is all serious upon my life.


FAith, Aunt, it is the first time I have had the honor to see you in my house;
and as a stranger I must salute you


As I live, Nephew, I Am ashamed to put you to this trouble.


It is an obligation. -- Mrs. Pleasant, I know you have not supped; I pray you
be pleased to taste these Sweetmeats, they are of Salls doing; but I
understand not Sweetmeats, the wine I Will answer for; and, in a word, you are
welcome: You are Patrona, and we your slaves


Good rest, and a pleasing dream, your humble servant wishes you.


Good night, Nephew; good night, Mr. Careless.


Good night, Mr. Careless; your humble servant, Mr. Wild.


Why I, here are men have some wit; By this good night, had we lain at my
servants, we should have found the laced Cap and Slippers that have been
entailed upon the Family these five descents, advanced upon the Cup-boards-head
instead of Plate.


They are a couple of the readiest youths too; how they run and do all things
with a thought! I love him for sending his Sister, a pretty wench


Pray, let us go to bed; I am weary.


You will not go to bed with all those windows open; sweet heart, prithee shut
them, and bring me hither; -- Do understand me? As I live, it is a great while
since I went to the Play


It has been one of the longest days; a year of them would be an Age.


Oh, do you grow weary; you will break your Covenant ere the year go out.


Prithee, shut the windows, and come pin up my hair.


SEE you wait diligently, and let them want nothing they call for; come shall
we go? it is very late


But how does VVanton carry it?


They saluted her; and Mrs. Pleasant swore you might see the Country-simplicity
in her Face


A pox upon her, crafty Gypsy.


Why, art not thou glad to see she can be honest when she will?


I Will show you all a Trick, for her, within these few days, or I Will miss my aim.


Come, let us go.


I have a mind to stay till Wanton comes.


Stay a little then, for 'twill not be long ere they be a Bed.


I hear VVanton's voice.


Are they a Bed?


Yes, and have so admired you, and Mr. Careless, and abused the Lovers; well,
Gentlemen, you are the wits of the time; but if I might counsel, well they
might lie alone this night; but it should go hard if I lay not with one of them
within a month


Were they so taken with their lodging?


All that can be said they said, you are the friendliest men, the readi'st men,
the handsom'st men that had wit; and could tell when to be civil, and when to
be wild; and Mrs. (what is her name) the Younger, asked why Mr. VVild did not go
a wooing to some rich Heir; upon her conscience, she said, you would speed


Well, well, there is a time for all things; come let us go.


Take a light. -- Good night, VVanton.


Do You hear, do you hear; let me speak with you.


What Is the business?


I cannot get hence this night: but your good angels hang at my heels; and if I
can prevail, you shall stay


What to do?


What to do? why I Will be hanged if all this Company do not guess.


Prithee, what should we stay for?


For the widow, and her Neice; are they worth the watching for a night?


Yes, certainly.


Then take my counsel, and let me give it out you are married, you have new
clothes come home this morning, and there is that you spoke of I Will fetch from
the Tailors, and here is a Parson shall rather give them his living, then stay
for a License; the Fiddlers too are ready to salute 'em


But if they refuse?


Which, upon my conscience, they will.


As you hope, else you are laughed at for missing the widow: Ned, follow my
counsel, appear at her Chamber window in thy Shirt, and salute all that passes
by; let me alone to give it out, and invite Company and provide dinner; then
when the business is known, and I have presented all your friends at Court with
Ribbands, she must consent, or her honor is lost, if you have but the grace to
swear it, and keep your own counsel


By this hand, he has reason; and I Will undertake the widow.


It will incense them, and precipitate the business which is in a fair way now;
and if they have wit, they must hate us for such a treachery


If they have wit they will love you; beside, if it come to that, we two will
swear we saw you married, and the Parson shall be sworn he did it: -- Priest,
will you not swear


Yes, any thing; what is it, Captain?


If this jest could do it, yet it is base to gain a wife so poorly; she came
hither too for sanctuary; it would be an uncivil and an unhospitable thing, and
look as if I had not merit enough to get a wife without stealing her from her
self; then, it is in mine own house


The better; nay, now I think on it, why came she hither? how do you know the
Plague is there? all was well at dinner; I Will be hanged if it be not a Plot;
the Lovers too whom you abused at dinner, are joined with them; a trick, a mere
trick of wit to abuse us; and to morrow when the Birds are flewn, they will laugh
at you, and say, Two Country Ladies put themselves naked into the hands of
three traveled City-wits, and they durst not lay hold on them


A pox upon these Niceties.


If they have not some design upon you hang me, why did they talk so freely
before me else


Let Us but try, we are not now to begin to make the world talk; nor is it a new
thing to them to hear we are mad fellows


If you get them, are they worth having?


Having? yes.


If you miss them the Jest is good; Prithee, Ned, let me prevail, it is but a
mad trick


If we would, how shall we get into the Chamber?


Let me alone for that; I Will put on my country simplicity, and carry in a
Chamber pot; then under Pretense of bolting the back door I Will open it, and yet
I grudge them the sport so honestly; for you wenchers make the best husbands;
after you are once married, one never see's you


I warrant thee wench.


No faith, I have observed it, they are still the doting'st husbands, and then
retreat and become Justices of the Peace, and none so violent upon the Bench,
as they, against us poor sinners; yet I Will do it, for upon my Conscience the
young Gentlewoman will fall upon her back, and thank me


Away, go then, and leave your fooling, and in the Morning, Ned, get in, and
plead naked with your hands in the bed


And if they cry, put your lips in their mouths, and stop them.


Why look you, you have the Authority of the Church too.


Well, I am now resolved; go you about your part, and make the Report strong.


And do you here? be sure you set the Cook at work, that if we miss we may have a
good Dinner, and good wine, to drink down our grief


Miss? I warrant thee thrive.


Nay, if I knock not down the VVidow, geld me, and come out to morrow complete
Uncle, and salute the Company, with, you are well-come Gentlemen, and good
morrow Nephew Ned


Uncle Tom, good morrow, Uncle Tom.


All Is done, the door is open, and they are as still as Childrens thoughts; it is
time you made you ready, which is, to put off your breeches, for it is almost
day; and take my Council, be sure to offer force enough, the less reason will
serve; Especially you, Master VVild, do not put a may'd to the pain of saying,
I


I warrant thee, wench; let me alone.


We Will in, and undress us, and come again; for we must go in at the back door.


I Will meet you, is the Captain gone?


Yes, yes, he is gone.


Come Master Parson, let us see the Cook in Readiness, where are the Fiddlers?
what will become of our Plot? for the Coachman; Master Sadd and his friend
will stink of their jest if this thrive


They have slept all night, on purpose, to play all day.


When the Ribbands and Points come from the Exchange, pray see the Fiddlers have
some, the Rogues will play so out of tune all day else, they will spoil the
dancing if the plot do take


Let Us see them in the Chamber first, and then I shall go with some heart about
the business; so, so, creep close and quietly; you know the way, the widow lies
in the high bed, and the Pallet is next the door


Must we creep?


Yes, Yes, down upon your knees, always, till you get a woman, and then stand
up for the Cause; stay let me shake my smock over you for luck sake


Why so, I warrant you thrive.


A pox take you, I Will pare your nails when I get you from this place once.


Sweet heart, sweet heart, off with your shoe.


I, with all my heart, there is an old shoe after you; would I gave all in my
shop the rest were furnished with wives too


Parson, the Sun is rising, go send in the Fiddlers, and set the Cook on work,
let him chap soundly


I have a tithe Pig at home, I Will e'ne sacrifice it to the Wedding.


They will find them in good Posture, they may take Privy marks if they please;
for they said it was so hot they could endure no clothes, and my simplicity
was so diligent to lay them naked, and with such 'twists and turns fastened them
to the feet, I Will answer for it, they find not the way into them in an hour


Why then they may pull up their Smocks, and hide their faces?


Master Jolly, there was one without would speak with you.


Who was it?


It is the Lady that talks so well.


They say indeed she has an Excellent Tongue, I would she had changed it for a
face; it is she that has been handsome


Who? not the Poetess we met at Master Sadds?


Yes, the same.


Sure she is mad.


Prithee tell her I am gone to bed.


I have done as well Sir; I told her Mistress Wanton was here, at which
discreetly, being touched with the guilt of her Face, she threw out a Curse or
two and retreated


Who is this you speak of, I will know who it is.


Why it is she that married the Genoway Merchant; they conzen'd one another.


Who? Pegg Driver, Bewgle Eyes?


The same, the same.


Why she is ugly now?


Yes, but I have known her, by this hand, as fine a wench as ever sinned in
Town or Suburbs; when I knew her first, she was the Original of all the
wayn-Scote Chambermaids, with Brooms, and barefoot Madams, you see sold at
Temple Bar, and the Exchange


Ah! thou art a Devil; how could thou find in thy heart to abuse her so? Thou
love Antiquities too; The very memory that she had been handsome should have
pleaded something


Was handsome signifies nothing to me.


But she is a wit, and a wench of an Excellent Discourse.


And as good company as any's in the Town.


Company? for whom? Leather-Ears, his Majesty of Newgate watch? There her story
will do well, while they louse themselves


Well, you are curious now, but the time was, when you have skipp'd for a kiss.


Prithee, Parson, no more of wit, and was handsome, but Wanton here, that is
kind, soft, sweet and sound; These are Epithetes for a Mistress; Nor is there
any Elegancy in a woman like it; give me such a naked Scence, to study Night
and Day; I care not for her Tongue, so her face be good; A whore dres't in
verse, and set speeches, tempts me no more to that sweet sin, then the Statute
of whipping can keep me from it; This thing we talked on, which retains nothing
but the name of what she was, is not only Poetical in her discourse, but her
Tears and her Love, her health, nay her Pleasure, were all Fictions, and had
scarce any live-flesh about her till I administered


Indeed it is time she sat out, and gave others leave to play; for a Reveren'd
whore is an unseemly sight; besides it makes the sin malicious, which is but
venial else


Sure, he will make a case of Conscience on it; you should do well (sweet heart)
to recommend her Case to your Brethren that attend the Committee of Affection,
that they may order her to be sound and young again, for the good of the
Commonwealth


OH, are you ready? are you ready?


Yes, and't like your worship.


And did you bid the Cook chop Lustily, and make a Noise?


Yes, Sir, he is at it.


I hear the Captain.


Have you brought Clothes and Ribbands?


Yes, yes, all is ready; did you hear them squeak yet?


No, by this light; I think, it is an appointment, and we have been all abused.


Give the Fiddlers their Ribbands, and carry the rest in; Mistress VVanton, you
must play my Ladys Woman to day, and Mince it to all that come, and hold up
your head finely when they kiss you, and take heed of swearing when you are
angry, and pledging whole cups when they drink to you


I Will warrant you, for my part.


Go get you in then, and let your husband dip the Rosemary.


Is all ready?


All, all, some of the Company are below already, I have so blown it about, one
Porter is gone to the Exchange, to invite Master Wild's Merchant to his
Wedding, and, by the way to bid two or three Fruiterers to send in Fruit for
such a Wedding, another in my Ladies name to Sall's, for sweet meats; I swore
at Bradborn in his Shop my self, that I wondered he would disappoint Master
Wild for his Points, and having so long warning; He protested 'twas not his
fault, but they were ready, and he would send John with them presently; One of
the Watermen is gone to the Mellon Garden, the other to Cooks at the Bear, for
some Bottles of his best Wine, and thence to Gracious-street, to the
Poulterers, and all with directions to send in Provisions for Master Wild's
Wedding; and who should I meet at Door, but Apricock Tom, and Mary, waiting to
speak with her young Master; they came to beg that they might serve the Feast;
I promised them they should, if they would cry it up and down the Town, to
bring Company; for Master Wild was resolved to keep open house


Why then here will be witnesses enough.


But who should I meet at the corner of the Piazza, but Joseph Tailor; he tells
me, there is a new Play at the Friars to day, and I have bespoke a Box for
Master Wild and his Bride


And did not he wonder to hear he was married?


Yes; but I told him, 'twas a Match his Aunt made for him, when he was abroad.


And I have spread it sufficiently at Court, by sending to borrow Plate for
such a Wedding


There Is half a dozen Coach fulls of Company lighted; they call for the
Bride-Laces and Points


Let the Fiddlers play then, and bid God give them joy, by the name of my Lady
Careless and Mistress Wild


Where shall we play, Sir?


Come with us, we will show you the window.


NIece, Niece, Niece Pleasant.


Ha! I hear you, I hear you, what would you have?


Do you not hear the Fiddlers?


Yes, yes, but you have waked me from the finest dream.


A dream, what was it? some knavery.


Why, I know not, but 'twas merry, e'ne as pleasing as some sins; well, I Will
lie no more in a man's bed, for fear I lose more then I get


Hark, that is a new Tune.


Yes, and they play it well; This is your Jaunty Nephew; I would he had less of
the Father in him, I Would venture to dream out my dream with him; In my
conscience he is worth a dozen of my dull Servant, that is such a troublesome
visitant, without any kind of convenience


I, I, so are all of that kind; give me your Subject Lover; Those you call
Servants are but troubles, I confess


What is the Difference, pray, betwixt a Subject, and a Servant Lover?


Why, one I have absolute Power over, the other's at large; Your Servant Lovers
are those take Mistresses upon trial, scarce give them a Quarters warning
before they are gone


Why, what do your Subject Lovers do? I am so sleepy.


Do? All things for nothing; then they are the diligent'st and the humblest
things a Woman can employ; Nay, I have seen of them tame, and run loose about a
house; I had one once, by this light, he would fetch and Carry, go back, seek
out, he would do any thing; I think some Faulconer bred him


By my Troth, I am of your mind.


He would come over, for all my Friends; but it was the dogged'st thing to my
enemies, he would sit upon's tail before them, and frown, like John a Napes
when the Pope is named; he heard me once praise my little Spanniel Bitch Smut
for waiting, and hang me if I stirred for seven years after, but I found him
lying at my door


And what became of him?


Faith, when I married he forsook me; I was advised since, that if I would
ha'spit in's mouth sometimes he would have stayed


That was cheap, But it is no certain way; for it is a general opinion, that
marriage is one of the certain'st cures for Love that one can apply to a man
that is sick of the sighings; yet if you were to live about this Town still,
such a Fool would do you a world of service; I Am sure Secret will miss him,
and would always take such a care of her has saved her a hundred walks for
Hoods and Masks


Yes, and I was certain of the earliest Fruits and Flowers that the Spring
afforded


By my troth, 'twas foolishly done to part with him; a few crumbs of your
affection would have satisfied him, poor thing


Thou art in the right; in this Town there is no living without 'em; they do
more service in a house for nothing, then a pair of those, what d' ye call
'ems, those he waiting-women, Beasts, that Custom impose upon Ladies


Is there none of them to be had now, think you? I Would feign get a tame one, to
carry down into the Country


Faith, I know but one breed of them about the Town that is right, and that is at
the Court; The Lady that has them brings 'em all up by hand; she breeds some
of them from very puppies; there is another wit too in the Town that has of
them; but hers will not do so many tricks; good sullen diligent waiters those
are which she breeds, but not half so serviceable


How does she do it? is there not a trick in it?


Only patience, but she has a heavy hand with 'em (they say) at first, and
many of them miscarry; she governes them with signs, and by the Eye, as Bank's
breeds his Horse; there are some too that arrive at writing, and those are the
right breed, for they commonly betake themselves to Poetry; and if you could
light on one of them, 'twere worth your money; for it is but using of him ill,
and praising his verses sometimes, and you are sure of him for ever


But do they never grow surly, Aunt?


Not, if you keep them from raw flesh, for they are a kind of Lyon-lovers; and
if they once taste the sweet of it, they will turn to their kind


Lord, Aunt, there will be no going without one this Summer into the Country;
pray let us enquire for one; either a he one to entertain us, or a she one to
tell us the story of her Love; it is excellent to bed-ward, and makes one as
drowsy as Prayers


Faith, Niece, this Parliament has so destroyed 'em, and the Platonic Humor,
that it is uncertain whether we shall get one or no; your leading Members in the
lower House have so cowed the Ladies, that they have no leisure to breed any of
late; Their whole endeavouts are spent now in feasting, and winning close
Committee Men, a rugged kind of sullen Fellows, with implacable stomachs and
hard hearts, that make the gay things court and observe them, as much as the
foolish Lovers use to do; Yet I think I know one she-Lover, but she is smitten
in years o'th wrong side of forty; I am certain she is poor too; and in this
lean Age for Courtiers, she perhaps would be glad to run this Summer in our
Park


Dear Aunt, let us have her; has she been famous? has she good Tales, think
you, of Knights? such as have been false or true to Love, no matter which


She cannot want cause to curse the Sex; handsome, witty, well born, and poor
in Court, cannot want the experience how false young men can be; Her Beauty has
had the highest fame; and those Eyes that weep now unpitied have had their
Envy, and a dazzling Power


And that Tongue, I warrant you, which now grows hoarse with flattering the
great Law-breakers, once gave Law to Princes; was it not so Aunt? Lord, shall I
die without begetting one story


Penthesilea, nor all the cloven Knights the Poets treat of, yclad in mightiest
Petticoats, did her excel for gallant deeds; and, with her Honor, still
preserved her Freedom; My Brother loved her; and I have heard him swear,
Minerva might have owned her Language; An Eye like Pallas, Juno's wrists, a
Venus for shape, and a Mind chaste as Diana, but not so rough; never uncivilly
Cruel, nor faulty kind to any; no vanity, that sees more then Lovers pay, nor
blind to a gallant Passion; Her Maxim was, he that could Love, and tell her so
handsomely, was better Company, but not a better Lover then a silent Man; Thus,
all Passions found her Civility, and she a value from all her Lovers. But
alas, Niece, this was (which is a sad word) was handsome, and was beloved, are
abhorred sounds in Women's ears.


Hark, the Fiddlers are merry still; will not Secret have the wit to find us
this morning, think you


God give you joy, Master Careless; God give your Ladyship joy, my Lady VVild.


What did the Fellow say? God give me joy?


As I live, I think so.


God give you joy, Mistress Pleasant Wild.


This is my Nephew, I smell him in this knavery.


Why did they give me joy by the name of Mistress VVild? I shall pay dear for a
nights lodging if that be so, especially lying


Rise, rise, for shame, the year's before you.


Why, Ned Wild, why Tom, will you not rise and let us in? what, is it not enough
to steal your wedding over night, but lock your selves up in the morning too?
All your Friends stay for points here, and kisses from the Brides


A little Patience, you will give us leave to dress us?


Why, what is a Clock, Captain?


It Is late.


Faith, so it was before we slept.


Why, Nephew, what means this rudeness? As I live, I Will fall out with you. This
is no jest


No, as I live, Aunt. We are in earnest; but my part lies here, and there is a
Gentleman will do his best to satisfy you; Pleasant, I know you have so much
wit as to perceive this business cannot be remedied by denials; here we are, as
you see, naked, and thus have saluted hundreds at the window that past by, and
gave us joy this morning


Joy, of what? what do you mean?


Madam, this is visible, and you may coy it, and refuse to call me Husband; But
I am resolved to call you Wise, and such


Promise your self that; see whether your fine wits can make it good; you will
not be uncivil


Not a hair but what you give, and that was in the Contract before we undertook
it; for any Man may force a Woman's Body, but we have laid we will force your
Mind


But that needs not, for we know by your discourse last night and this morning,
we are Men you have no aversion to; and I believe, if we had taken time and
wooed hard, this would have come a course; but we had rather win you by wit,
because you defied us


It Is very well, if it succeed.


And, for my part, but for the jest of winning you, and this way, not ten
joynters should have made me marry


This is a new way of wooing.


It Is so, Madam; but we have not laid our plot so weakly (though it were
sudden) to leave it in any bodies power but our own to hinder it


Do you think so?


We are secure enough, if we can be true to our selves.


Yet we submit in the midst of our strength, and beg you will not wilfully
spoil a good jest by refusing us. By this hand, we are both sound, and we'll
be strangely honest, and never in ill humors, but live as merry as the Maids,
and divide the year between the Town and the Country; What say you, is it a
Match? Your bed is big enough for two, and my meat will not cost you much; I Will
promise nothing but one heart, one purse betwixt us, and a whole dozen of
boys, is it a bargain


Not, if I can hinder it, as I live.


Faith, Mistress Pleasant, he has spoken nothing but reason, and I Will do my
best to make it good; Come faith, teach my Aunt what to do, and let me strike
the bargain upon your Lips


No, Sir, not to be half a Queen; if we should yield now your wit would
dominere for ever; and still in all disputes (though never so much reason on
our side) this shall be urged as an Argument of your Master wit to confute us;
I am of your Aunts mind, Sir; and if I can hinder it, it shall be no match


Why then know, it is not in your Powers to prevent it.


Why, we are not married yet.


No, it is true.


By this good light then I Will be dumb for ever hereafter, lest I light upon the
words of Marriage by chance


It Is hard, when our own Acts cannot be in our own power, Gentlemen.


The plot is only known to four, the Minister and two that stood for Fathers,
and a simple Country Maid that waited upon you last night, which plays your
Chamber-maids part


And what will all these do?


Why, the two friends will swear, they gave you; the Parson will swear, he
married you; and the wench will swear, she put us to bed


Have you men to swear we are married?


And a Parson to swear he did it?


Yes.


And a wench that will swear, she put us to Bed?


Yes, By this good light, and witness of reputation.


Dare they or you look us in the face, and swear this?


Yes faith, and all but those four know no other but really it is so; and you
may deny it, but I Will make Mr. Constable put you to bed, with this proof, at
night


Pray, let us see these witnesses.


Call in the four only.


Well, this shall be a warning to me; I say nothing, but if ever I lie from
home again


I Will lie with you.


It Is well; I dare say, we are the first women (if this take) that ever were
stolen against their wills


I Will go call the Gentlemen.


I that have refused a fellow that loved me these seven years, and would have
put off his hat, and thanked me to come to bed, to be beaten with watch-mens
staves into another; For by this good light, for ought that I perceive,
there is no keeping these out at night


And unless we consent to be their wives, to day, M. Justice will make us their
whores at night: oh, oh, what would not I give to come off! not that I mislike
them, but I hate they should get us thus


Follow. -- Will not you two swear we were married last night?


Capt. Yes, By this light, will we.


Will not you swear you married us?


Yea, verily.


And come hither, pretty one, will not you swear you left us all a bed last
night, and pleased


Yes forsooth; I Will swear any thing your worship shall appoint me.


But, Gentlemen, have you no shame, no conscience; will you swear false, for
sport


By this light, I Will swear, if it be but to vex you: Remember you refused me,
[That is contrary to Covenants though with my brace of Lovers; what will they
do with their Coach-mans


And, faith, Madam, I have sworn many times false, to no purpose; and I should
take it ill, if it were mine own case, to have a friend refuse me an Oath upon
such an occasion


And are you all of one mind?


Verily we will all swear.


Will you verily? what shall we do, Aunt?


Do you laugh? By this light, I am heartily angry.


Why, As I live, let us marry them, Aunt, and be revenged.


Marry, where is the Parson?


Here, here, M. Parson, come and do your Office.


That fellow? No, by my troth, let us be honestly joined, for lucks sake, we
know not how soon we may part


What shall she do for a Parson? Captain, you must run and fetch one.


Yes, yes; but methinks this might serve turn; By this hand, he is a Marshal,
and a Case, by Sire and Dam; pray try him, By this light, he comes of the best
preaching kind in Essex


Not I, As I live, that were a blessing in the Devils name.


A pox on your wedding; give me my wife and let me be gone.


Nay, nay, no choler, Parson; the Ladies do not like the color of your Beard.


No, no, fetch another, and let them escape with that trick, then they will jeer
your beards blew, in faith


By this hand, he is in the right; either this Parson, or take one another
words; to Bed now, and marry when we rise


As I live, you come not here till you are married; I have been no body's whore
yet, and I will not begin with my husband


Will you kiss upon the bargain, and promise before these witnesses not to
spoil our jest, but rise and go to Church


And what will M. Constant and M. Sadd say?


Why, I Will run and invite them to the wedding; and you shall see them expire in
their own Garters


No, no, never fear't, their jest is only spoiled.


Their jest, what jest?


Faith, now you shall know it, and the whole Plot: In the first place, your
Coachman is well, whose death, we, by the help of Secret, contrived, thinking
by that trick to prevent this danger, and carry you out of Town


But had they this Plot?


Yes faith, and see how it thrives; they will fret like carted Bauds when they
hear this news


Why, Aunt; would you have thought M. Sadd a Plotter? well, it is some comfort
we have them to laugh at


Nay faith, then, Gentlemen, give us leave to rise, and I Will take my venture,
if it be but for a revenge on them


Gentlemen, bear witness.


Come, come away, I Will get the points; I Am glad the Coach-man's well, the
Rogue had like to have spoild our Comedy


MArried?


And to them?


I, married, if you prevent it not; caught with a trick, an old stale trick; I
have seen a Ballad on it


We shall go near to prevent 'em. -- Boy, My Sword.


Whither so fast?


You guess.


If you mean the wedding, you come too late.


Why, are they married?


No, but lustily promised.


We may come time enough to be revenged though. --


Upon whom? your selves, for you are only guilty: who carried them thither last
night? who laid the Plot for the Coachman


Why, do they know it?


Well, you will find the Poet a Rogue, it is he that has betrayed you; and if
you will take my counsel, be revenged upon him


Nay, we were told he did not love us.


By my life, you wrong him; upon my knowledge the Poet meant you should have
them


Why, who had the power to hinder then?


I know not where the fault lies directly; they say, the wits of the Town would
not consent to it, they claim a right in the Ladies, as Orphan-wits


The wits! hang 'em in their strong lines.


Why I, such a clinch as that has undone you; and upon my knowledge 'twere
enough to hinder your next match


Why, what have they to do with us?


I know not what you have done to disoblige them; but they crossed it; there was
amongst 'em too a pair of she-wits, something stricken in years; they grew in
fury at the mention of it, and concluded you both with an authority out of a
modern Author; besides it is said, you run naturally into the six-peny Room and
steal sayings, and a discourse more then your peny-worth of jests, every Term;
why, just now, you spit out one jest stolen from a poor Play, that has but two
more in five Acts; what conscience is there in it, knowing how dear we pay Poets
for our Plays


'Twas, Madam, with the ill face, one of those whom you refused to salute the
other day, at Chipps house; a Chees-cake had saved all this


Why do you not make haste about your business, but lose time with this Babbler?


Madam, will you give us leave to make use of your Coach?


You may command it, Sir; when you have done, send him to the Exchange, where
I Will dispatch a little business, and be with you immediately


So, this fire's kindled; put it out that can. What would not I give for a
Peepers place at the meeting; I Will make haste, and it shall go hard but I Will
bear my part of the mirth too


MAster Jolly, I find I am naturally inclined to mirth this day, and methinks
my Corns ache more then my Horns; and to a man that has read Seneca a Cuckold
ought to be no grief; especially in this Parish where I see such droves of St.
Lukes clothing; there is little Secret too, th'allay of waiting woman, makes me
hope, she may prove metal of the Parsons standard. Find a way to rid me of
Wanton, and I Will put in to be Chaplain to this merry family; if I did not
enveigle formal Secret, you should hang me; I know the trick on it; it is but
praying too, and preaching of the waiting woman, then carefully seeing her
cushion laid, with her book and leaf turned down, does it, with a few Anagrams,
Acrosticks, and her name in the Register of my Bible: these charm the
soft-soul'd sinner; then sometimes to read a piece of my Sermon, and tell her,
a Saturday, where my Text shall be, spells that work more then Philtres


If you can be serious, we will think of this at leisure. -- See how they eye
Wanton


What? consulting Parson? let us be judges betwixt you; do you hear, Jack, if he
offers ready money, I counsel, as a friend, take it; for, By this light, if you
refuse it, your wife will not; do you see those gay Petti-coats


Yes, if you mean my wifes.


You know they are his, and she only wears 'em for his pleasure; and it is
dangerous to have a wife under another man's Petticoats; what if you should find
his breeches upon hers


Are not you married too? take care that yours does not wear the Breeches,
another kind of danger, but as troublesome as that, or sore-eyes; and if she
get but a trick of taking as readily as she is persuaded to give, you may find a
horn at home; I have seen a Cuckold of your complexion; if he had had as much
hoof as horn, you might have hunted the beast by his slat


How fine she is! and, By this light, a handsome wench, Mr. Jolly, I am easier
persuaded to be reconciled to your fault, then any man's; I have seen, of this
kind; her eyes have more Arguments in 'em then a thousand of those that seduce
the world; hang me if those Quivers be not full of Darts; I could kiss that
mouth, my self, is this she my Aunt quarreled with you for


The same, self-same. And by this hand, I was barbarous to her, for your Aunts
sake; and had I not escaped that mischief of matrimony, By this light, I had had
never seen her again; but I was resolved not to quit her, till I was sure of a
wife, for fear of what has followed; had I been such an Ass as to have left her
upon the Aerie hopes of a widows Oaths; what a case had I been in now? You see,
your Aunt's provided of a man. Bless him, and send him patience, 'twould have
been fine to have seen me walking, and sighing upon cold hunting, seeking my
whore again, or forced to make use of some common mercenary thing that sells
sin and diseases, crimes, penance and sad repentance together; here is
consolation and satisfaction, in Wanton, though a man lose his meal with the
widow. And, faith, be free, how do you like my Girl; rid thee of her; what
does she want now, pray, but a jointure, to satisfy any honest man? speak your
conscience; Ladies don't you think a little repentance, hereafter, will serve,
for all the small sins that good nature can act with such a sinner


Pray, Sir, remember she is my wife; and be so civil to us both, as to forget
these things


For that, Jack, we will understand hereafter, it is but a trick of youth, man, and
her jest ill make us both merry, I warrant thee


Pray, Sir, no more of your jestes, nor your Jack; remember my Coat and
Calling. This familiarity both with my wife and my self, is not decent; your
Clergy with Christen names are scarce held good Christians


I wonder at nothing so much as M. Jollies mirth, to day; where lies his part
of the jest? cozened or refused by all, not a fish that stays in's Net.


No, what is this? show me a fairer in all your streams; nor is this my single
joy, who am pleased to find you may be cozened; rejoice to see you may be
brought to lie with a man for a jest; let me alone to fit you with a trick too


Faith, it must be some new trick; for thou art so beaten at the old one,
'twill neither please thee nor her; besides, I mean to teach her that my self


I shall never be perfectly quiet in my mind, till I see some body as angry as
my self; yet I have some consolation when I think on the wise plot that killed
the Coachman, how the Plague, Red-cross and Halberd has cut their fingers that
designed it, their anger will be perfect. Secret says they are coming, and that
the Lady Love-all has given 'em the Alarm


And see where the parties come, -- Storms and tempests in their minds, their
looks are Daggers


Servant, what? you are melancholy and full of wonder; I see you have met the
news


Yes Madam, we have heard a report that will concern both your judgment and
your honor


Alas, Sir, we are innocent; it is mere predestination.


All weddings, Mr. Sadd, you know go by chance, like hanging.


And, I thank my Stars, I have escaped hanging; to have been his Bride had been
both


This is not like the promise you made us yesterday.


Why truly, Servant, I scarce know what I do yet; the fright of the Plague had
so possessed my mind with fear that I could think and dream of nothing, last
night, but of a tall black man, that came and kissed me in my sleep, and slap'd
his whip in mine Ears, 'twas a saucy Ghost, (not unlike my Coachman that is
dead) and accused you of having a hand in his murder, and vowed to haunt me
till I was married, I told my niece the dream


Nay, the Ghost sighed, and accused Secret and Master Sadd; of making him away
confess, faith, had you a hand in that bloody jest


Fie, Servant; could you be so cruel as to join with my woman against me?


It Is well, Ladys; why a Pox do you look at me, this was your subtle plot; a
Pox on your Clarks wit; you said the jest would beget a Comedy when 'twas
known, and so I believe 'twill


Madam, I find you have discovered our design, whose chief end was, to prevent
this mischief which I doubt not, but you will both live to repent your share of,
before you have done traveling to the Epsams, Burbons, and the Spawes, to cure
those traveled diseases these Knights errant have, with Curiosity, sought out
for you; It Is true, the are mischiefs that dwell in pleasant Countries, yet
those Roses have their thorns; and I doubt not, but these gentlemen's wit may
sting as well as please, sometime; and you may find it harder to satisfy their
travailed Experience, then to have suffered our homebred ignorance


Hark, if he be not fallen into a fit of his Cozen; These names of Places he
has stolen out of her Receipt-book; amongst all whose diseases, find me any so
dangerous, troublesome or incurable, as a fool, a lean, pale, sighing, coughing
fool, that is rich and poor both, being born to an estate, without a mind or
heart capable to use it, of a nature so miserable he grudges himself meat; nay,
they say, he eats his meals twice, a fellow whose breath smells of yesterdays
dinner, and stinks as if he had eat all our Suppers over again; I would advise
you Mr. Sadd to sleep with your mouth open, to air it, or get the Brewer to Ton
it; Faugh, an empty Justice, that stinks of the Lees and Casks, and belches
Littleton and Ploydens Cases; do thou think any woman that has wit, or
honor, would kiss that Bung-hole; by this light, his head and belly look as
blew and lank as French Rabbets, or stale Poultry; Alas, Sir, my Lady would
have a husband to rejoice with, no green-tail'd Lecturer, to stand Centry at
his beds side, while his nasty soul scoures through him, sneaking out at the
back door. -- These, Sir, are diseases which neither the Spaw, or Bath, can
cure your Garters and Willow are a more certain remedy


Well, Sir, I find our plot's betrayed, and we have patience left; It Is that
damned Captain has informed


Yet it is one comfort, Madam, that you have missed that man of war, that Knight
of Finsbury; His Dowager, with Ale and Switches, would have bred a Ballad


Faith, Sir, you see what a difficulty it is, in this Age, for a woman to live
honest, though she have a proper man to her husband; therefore it behooves us to
consider, who we choose


The Lady has Reason; for being allowed but one, who would choose such weazel's
as we see daily mary'd, that are all head and Tail, crooked, dirty, sold
Vermin, predestined for Cuckolds, painted Snails, with houses on their backs,
and horns as big as Dutch Cows; would any woman marry such? nay, can any woman
be honest, that lets such Hod-man-dods crawle over her Virgin breast, and
Belly, or suffer 'em to leave their slimy paths upon their bodies only for
Joyntures? Out, it is Mercenary and base; The generous heart has only the Laws
of Nature and kindness in her view; and when she will oblige, Friend is all the
ties that nature seeks, who can both bear and excuse those kind crimes; And I
believe, one as poor as the despised Captain, and neglected Courtier, may make
a woman as happy in a Friendship as Master Sadd, who has as many faults as we
have debts; one, whose Father had no more credit with Nature, then ours had
with Fortune; whose soul wears Rags as well as the Captains body


Nay then, I Will laugh; for I perceive, you are angryer then we; Alas, has lost
both ventures, Wanton, and the Widow


Both, and neither so unlucky as to be thy wife; thy face is hanged with blacks
already, we may see the Bells toll in thy Eyes; A Bride and a Wedding Shirt? a
Sexton and a winding sheet? a Scrivener to draw up Joyntures? A Parson to make
thy will, man; by this light he is as Chap-fallen as if he had layen under the
Table all night


Faith, Master Sadd, he is parlously in the right; never think of marrying in
this dull clime, wedlock's a trade you will never go through with; wives
draw-bills upon sight, and't will not be for your credit to protest 'em; rather
follow my counsel, and Marry la Venetiano for a night and away; a Pistol
Jointure does it; then it is but repenting in the morning, and leave your woman,
and the sin both, in the Bed; But if you play the fool, like your friends, and
Marry in serious earnest, you may repent it too, as they do; but where is the
remedy


What was it you said, Sir, do you repent?


By this hand, Widow, I don't know; but we have pursued a jest a great way.
Parson, are you sure we are married


Yes, I warrant you, for their escaping.


Their escaping? fool, thou mistak'st me, there is no fear of that; but I would
fain know, if there be no way for me to get out of this Nooze; No hole to hide
a man's head in from this Wedlock


Not any, but what I presume she will show you anon.


Hum! Now do I feel all my fears flowing in upon me; Wanton and Mistress
Pleasant both grow dangerously handsome, a Thousand Graces in each, I never
observed before, now, just now, when I must not taste, I begin to long for some
of their Plums


Is this serious, Sir?


Yes truly, Widow, sadly serious; Is there no way to get three or four
mouthfulls of Kisses from the Parsons wife


This is sad, Sir, upon my Wedding day, to despise me, for such a Common thing.


As sad, as I could wish; This is a jest makes me laugh. -- Common? no Madam,
that is two bitter, she is forest only, where the Royal Chase is as free as Fair


Were not you a Widow to day?


Yes faith, Girl, and as foolish a one as ever Coach jumbled out of joint.


Stay then till to morrow, and tell me the difference betwixt us.


I hope, thou wilt prove a She-prophet; could I live to see thee turn honest
wife, and she the Wanton Widow


I cannot but laugh, to see how easy it is, to lose or win the opinion of the
world; a little custom heals all, or else what is the difference betwixt a
Married Widow and one of us? can any woman be pure, or worth the serious
sighing of a Generous heart, that has had above one hand laid upon her? is
there place to write above one Lovers name, with honor, in her heart; it is
indeed for one a Royal Palace; but if it admits of more, an Hospital, or an
Inn, at best, as well as ours; only off from the Road, and less frequented


Shrewdly urged.


And though the sins of my Family threw me into want, and made me subject to
the treachery of that broken faith, to whose perjury I owe all my Crimes, yet
still I can distinguish betwixt that folly and this honor, which must tell
you; He or she that would be thought twice so, was never once a Lover


Parson, thou art fitted; A whore, and Apothegms! what sport will she make us
under a Tree, with a Sallad, and sayings, in the Summer


Come, Wanton, no fury; you see my Aunts angry.


So am I, Sir, and yet can calmly reason this truth; Married Widows, though
chaste to the Law and Custom, yet their second Hymen's make that which was but
dying in the first husbands Bed, a stain in the second sheets, where all their
kindness and repeated embraces want their value, because they are sullied and
have lost their Luster


By this light, I Will go to School to Wanton, she has opened my Eyes, and I
begin to believe I have escaped miraculously; By this hand, wench, I was within
an inch of being married to this Danger; for what can we call these second
submissions, but a tolerated lawful Mercenaryness, which though it be a rude
and harsh expression, yet your Carriage deserves it


Fie, Master Sadd, pray leave being witty; I fear, it is a mortal sin, to begin
in the fifth Act of your Days upon an old subject too, abusing of Widows,
because they despise you


Alas, Niece, let him alone, he may come in, for his share; the Parson, that
has so often received 'em, will not refuse him Tithes, there, in Charity


That, or Convenience, Interest, or Importunity, may, by your Example prevail;
But it is not fair play, Madam, to turn your Lover to the Common, as you call
it, now he is rid lean in your service; take heed, Mr. Careless, and warning
Mr. Sadd; you see how fit for the Scavengers team your Lady leaves her Lovers


Such a Lecture before I had Married would have made me have considered of this
matter. D'ost thou hear Wanton, let us forgive one another, being Married, for
that folly has made us guilty alike


And I would fain know the difference betwixt ours, and a wedding crime, which
is worst; to let love, youth and good humor betray us to a kindness, or to be
gravely seduced by some aunt or uncle, without consideration of the disparity
of Age, Birth, or Persons, to lie down before a Jointure; Ladies, you may
flatter your selves, but the ingenuous part of the world cannot deny, but such
minds, had they been born where our faults are not only tolerated but
protected, would have listened to the same things, Interest counsels thereto


Parson, what Boot betwixt Our Wives? either come to a Price, or draw off your
Doxy


Propose, propose, here will be mirth anon.


Yes, yes, propose, while I break it to your Lady; Madam, you see, here is a
proper man to be had, and money to boot -- what, dumb


No, she is only thinking; faith, Madam, try 'em both to Night, and choose
tomorrow


Come, no more of this; Aunt, take my word for your husband, that have had more
experience of him then all these; it is true, he will long for these Girls, as
children do for plums; and when h'as done, make a meal upon cheese; and you
must not wonder, nor quarrel at what he says in his humor, but Judge him by his
Actions; and when he is in his fit, and raves most, put him into your bed, and
fold him close in your Arms, Aunt; if he does not rise as kind and as good a
husband as he that sings Psalms best, hang me; why, you're a fool, aunt; a
widow, and dislike a longing Bridegroom! I thought you had known better; do you
love a spurred horse, rather then a Duker, that neighs, and scrapes? I would
not say this, but that I know him; let him not go out of your sight, for he is
now in season, a Ripe mature husband; No delays; if you let him hang longer
upon hope his fruit will fall alone


You are merry, Sir; But if I had known this humor.


You Would have kissed him first; but being ignorant, let me make you blush; come, a
kiss, and all is Friends. -- how now, Sir, again, again, Aunt, look to your self


Um! By this light, sweet heart, and I thank thee; Nay widow, there is no
jesting with these things -- Nay, I am a Lion, in my


Since all are cozened, why should I be troubled at my fortune; faith
Gentlemen, what will you two give me for a wife, betwixt you


Faith, they 're mischiefs dear bought, though a man get 'em for nothing.


I Am almost of his mind; and if other people find no more pleasure in a
married life then I, upon my wedding day, I Would pass my time in the Piazza, with
the Mountebank, and let him practice upon my Teeth, and draw'em too ere he
persuades the words of matrimony out of my mouth again. I, I, M. Constant, you
may laugh, you ha missed a wife; would I were in your case, the world should
see how cheerfully I should bear such an affliction


Jack, I ha made my peace at home, and by seeing others ship-wrack'd will avoid
the danger, and here resolve, never to sigh again for any woman; they are weeds
grow in every hedge; and transplanting of them thus to our Beds gives certain
trouble, seldom pleasure, never profit


See where the enemy comes; now if you be wise, arm, and unite against him, as
a common foe; he is come from his old Lady, designing a reconciliation; the
Rogue's provident, and would fain have a Nest for his Age to rest in; Buff and
Feathers do well in the youth and heat of thirty; but in the winter of old age,
Captain at threescore, lame and lean, may lie with the Almanac out of date


The Parson's grown witty, and prophesies upon the strength of Bride-Cake; if I
guess aright, thou wilt be hanged; for it is a truth, I have been endeavoring to
make it appear, her fears were mistaken in me: but I find the witch more
implacable then the Devil; the waiting woman is harder to forgive her part,
then my Lady. Faithful will not be reconciled, the merciless Baud is all fire
and sword, no quarter; Bless me from an old waiting-womans wrath; she will never
forgive me the disappointing her of a promise when I was drunk; her Lady and
she are coming, but in such a fury, I would not have the storm find you in the
street; therefore. I counsel you to avoid the boys, and take shelter in the
next house


No, let us home, and with all diligence get our dinner, to defend us; and let
the Porter dispute it at the wicket, till she signs Articles of peace


Agreed. --


See how they pair now, it is not threescore year will part 'em now he has
tasted a kiss or two


Parson, I Will be your Bride-man.


It Is well, Sir, I shall ha my time too.


I by this hand; nay, we will share fairly.


That Is but reason, Wanton; and since he grows tame, use him kindly for my sake.


Can any of you digest Sponge and Arsenick?


Arsenick? what is that?


An Italian Sallad, which I Will dress for you, By Jove, er'e I Will walk in my
Canonical-coat lined with horn; Death, if I suffer this, we shall have that
damned Courtier pluck on his shoes with the Parsons Musons; fine in faith, none
but the small Levites brow to plant your shooing-horn-feed in? -- How now?


Prithee, Jack, stay, and say something to the Gentlemen, by way of Epilogue.
Thou art a piece of a scurvey Poet thy self, prithee oblige the Author, and
give us a line or two in praise of his Play


I oblige him? hang him and all his friends, and hurt no body; yes, I Am likely
to speak for him; you see how I'ha been used to day betwixt you, I shall find a
time to be revenged, let go my cloak; I have a Province, within, of mine own to
govern, let me go


Who, thy wife? faith stay, and give them an opportunity; thy pain will be the
sooner over: you see it is a thing resolved betwixt 'em, and now you are
satisfied in the matter, be wise and filent; who knows what good she may do
thee another time; I dare say, if she had as many souls in her as she had men,
she would bring thee a cure of her self


Let me go, or I shall be as troublesome as you are injurious, for all your
Titles, Sir


Lend me your cloak then, to appear more decent; you would not ha me present
Epilogue in Buff, whoreson Dunce, with a red nose


Sir, my business is praying, not Epilogues.


With that face? By this light, it is a scandal to see it flaming so near the
altar; thou look as if thou would cry tope, in the face of the Congregation,
instead of Amen


You Are an Ass, it is proper there, t'has zeal and servor in it, and burns
before the Altar like the primitive Lamps


I cry thee mercy; By this light, he will make it sacrilege anon to steal his
nose; thou wilt entitle the Altar to that Coal; was it not kindled Ex voto? nay, I
will have your cloak


Take it; would 'twere Nessus his shirt, for you and your Poets sake.


What, does the Rogue wish 'twere made of Nettles?


By your favor, Sir; did you see any company pass this way?


None, but the three Brides, and they are gone just before you. -- Hark, the
Music will guide you


Is it certain then they re married?


Yes, Lady, I saw the Churches rights performed.


Why does your Ladyship lose time in talking with this fellow; don't you know
him, Madam? it is the rascally Captain, hid in a black cloak; I know you, Sirrah


She has reason; now I mark him better, I should know that false face too; see
Faithful, there are those treacherous eyes still


Alas, you mistake me, Madam, I am Epilogue now; the Captain's within; and as a
friend I counsel you, not to incense the Gentlemen against the Poet, for he
knows all your story; and if you anger him he will put it in a Play; but if you will
do friendly offices, I Will undertake, instead of your Pearl you lost, to help
you to the Jewel, the Scotch Dictionary will tell you the value of it; let them
go alone, and fret not at their loss; stay, and take my counsel, it shall be
worth three revenges


Well, what is it, Sir?


They say, you have a great power over the Parson; if you can prevail with him
to express his anger in some Satyrick Comedy (for the knave has wit, and they
say his genius lies that way,) tell him, it is expected he should be revenged
upon the illiterate Courtier that made this Play; if you can bring this
business about, I may find a way, as Epilogue, to be thankful, though the
Captain abused you to day. Think on it, Stephen is as handsome, when the Play is
done, as Mr. Wild was in the Scene


There Is something of reason in what he says. -- But my friend, how shall one
believe you; you that were such a Rascal to day, in Buff, is it to be hoped you
can be honest only with putting on a black cloak? well, I Will venture once
again; and if I have any power, he shall sting the malicious Rascal; and I
think he is fit for such a business. I Am sure he has the worst tongue; and a
conscience that neither honor nor truth binds; and therefore it is to be
believed, if he will rail in public he may be even with your Poet; I will
cloth and feed him and his Muse this seven years, but I will plague him:
Secret tells me, 'twas your Poet too that pawned me, to day, in the Tavern


By my faith, did he; nay 'twas he that told me of your friendship with Jolly.


I wonder the Parson has been so long silent; a man of his coat and parts, to
be beaten with a pen, by one that speaks sense by rote, like Parots; one that
knows not why sense is sense, but by the sound; one that can scarce read, nay,
not his own hand; well, remember your promise


Leave it to me, he is yours; and if our Plot take, you shall all have your
shares in the mirth; but not the profit of the Play; and the Parson, more then
his Tithe, a second day


We will discourse of this some other time; and pray dispatch what it is you
have to say to this noble company, that I may be gone; for those Gentlemen will
be in such fury, if I stay; and think, because we are alone, God knows what


It Is no matter what they think, it is not them we are to study now; but these
guests, to whom pray address your self civilly, and beg that they would please
to become Fathers, and give those Brides within; what say you, Gentlemen, will
you lend your hands to join them; the Match you see is made; if you refuse,
Stephen misses the Wench, and then you cannot justly blame the Poet. For you
know, they say, that alone is enough to spoil the Play



