THOMASO, OR, The Wanderer: A COMEDY. The Scene MADRID.

Written in MADRID BY THOMAS KILLIGREW: In Two Parts.

DEDICATED TO THE FAIR AND KIND FRIENDS TO Prince PALATINE POLIXANDER.

LONDON: Printed by J. M. for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the sign of the Blew Anchor, in the lower Walk of the New-Exchange. 1663

WHat? The death of the brave General has begot discourse and change in Madrid;
I hear the Action too, though most Noble, traduo'd by his Enemies; Wretches
that durst not look upon the dangers his gallant Mind broke through daily:
Their Envy will not let him find peace in his Grave neither


That cloud is dispersed now; it is true, at first we had the report of a total
rout, and that the Enemy advanced to Pampalone, with which the affrighted
people began to fall into some passion against him, who had been so unlucky as
to command that day


But when they were for certain informed of the following Action, How, contrary
to all hope, he had engaged and stopped the Enemy, and at the rate of his own
life purchased their safety by throwing himself into certain dangers, The whole
City lamented his loss, and he has been honored and mourned for as a General
Parent


And with Justice he might expect it; for Decius fell not more vowed the Roman
Deliverer, then our General a sacrifice for his Country; But he is gone, and
with him a Soldier, and such a one, Johanne, as his Enemies both admired and
feared; We shall see how his Successor will redeem those miseries we are
fallen into by his Envy and opposition of the dead General in all his designe^


Of this some other time, when we have paid those joys are due to the return
of our Friend and Patron; Who if he hold his good humor still, there is news
in Town will concern him much much more; The famous Paduana, Angelica Bianca


Who? The Italian, our dea^ General brought from Main? What of her?


The same; She is now the discourse of the whole Town; all the youth in Madrid
dress themselves for her sake; Their Horses prance in no street but hers, hers
are the Colors they all wear in the Prado; Where her Coach drives there is the
dust, there is the throng; No song in fashion but her praise, her Story is the
Theme of all the Muses in the Town


Prithe^ be quick and serious this is strange to me; Why now more then when her
Patron lived


That Is the news; Know then, since the Generals death she is exposed to sale;
Her price and Picture hangs upon the door, where she sits in public view dressed
like Aurora, and breaks like the day from her window; She is now the subject of
all the Love and Envy of the Town* it is sport to hear the Men sigh for, and the
Women rail at her. And if Don Pedro be a Lover still, there is no need of
Fayries, old Women, or Confessors, to deliver or return a Message; Now it is but
so much a Month, and you are Patron; four days and nights in the week are
yours


You amaze me; it is true, I Love the Girl with all the passion youth can with
Honor spare one of her humor; (but no farther) And if money or a sword can
purchase her. I Will bid as fair a^ another but I Will enjoy her


Now do not I see that witchery, that M^gi^k inner face; she is to me no such
excellence, but that a Man may ^^d greater Beauties in the two Sisters,
especially in the Sar^ta


Old Carlo, constant Carlo still; Thou art one of those believ'st it is a duty
to love a Mistress till her Eyes change color for fear he should get the name
of an unconstant Lover


Faith, Sir, we are the same Men you left us, I am for Paulina still; Yet I
believe, it is rather laziness then constancy; we are acquainted; and though
both are weary, yet both are ashamed to say so; and till she can find one that
pays better, or I one that pleases better, it is like to be the same dull
Matrimony it has been


You are patient men; keep to one Wench a year! I would wear one shirt, one
pair of shoes, or eat of one dish as soon as let the Sun set twice upon the
same sin of their form in my company; I would flea a kennel of Spanniels in the
Dog Days as soon, for the Quarrey and skins of the vermin; I dare say, I have
had a hundred since; all praised and adored by some body, though forgot by me;
such Saints as these I could never pray to; there is none of them have any
charms in their eyes, no fear nor terror in their frowns, nor can their
kindness surprise a heart; I never found my self grow greater, or less in my
mind, when they were pleased, or angry, unsavory, flat, insippid beauties, good
meals meat, but no Feasts; no Banquet in their faces, Carlo; there is no Music
in their Caresses, no Empire in ruling over such hearts; yet it is truth,
Saretta's voice and humor is good, and her skin not ill, but she is dull; a
soul that neither youth nor beauty can awake; she only works in her trade, and
sells so much love; a dull sufferer only, no acting party in the Bed


That Is not her Sisters fault; a Squirril in a Cage, or a Dog with a bottle at
his tail, will lie still as soon as Paulina; she has indeed as much fire as her
Sister has Phlegm


I, she burns her Cake, and the others comes out dough; their Ovens, Johanne,
would be better heat if the fire were divided; and I cannot but wonder to hear
thee praise her for being kind; I have beaten her to make her lie still; their
kindness to me is like Dogs that leap upon me, and dirty me; a fawning
dissembling whore that frisks to all men, and is as free of her bones as her
Sister is sparing of her flesh; she is the Emblem of a lean Prodigal that
spends all; and Saretta of a fat Usurer that will spend nothing


Yet she was once such an Humor, such a Dancer, such a Wit, such a Shape, such
a Voice; 'twas Comedy but to see or hear her


I, for once she was, and for once she may be all this again; and but for once,
whoever shall practice her longer shall find her the other; besides, I am now
weary of purchasing beauty by the peny-worth; here one for a voice; there
another for a shape or humor; no, Johanne, if Carlo's news be true, I Will sell
all those ends of Gold and Silver; and turn out all those common people of my
heart; and fit the Palace for a Princess, and purchase that Jewel which is now
at sale; and trade no more for days and nights, as I have done with these
Cattle upon the Common; but raise a sum, and in the divine formed Angellica
purchase all those several beauties contracted and united there in one which we
find scattered and dispersed in other women


Now is your time for a thousand Crowns a month; four days and nights in the
week she is yours


A thousand crowns a month! sure she makes but few Musters in the year.


Faith, it is thought she has vowed chastity; and takes this way to be private,
and I am of their opinion; for sure there are few will give so much money for a
cast Mistress of any man's, bred in craft and dissimulation, and Mistress of her
trade as she is


That Is ridiculous; for though a wife cannot be too ignorant which is honest;
yet give me a Hawk in flying, a Hound that is made, a Horse that is dressed, and a
knowing wench, so she learn it in her youth; Come, let us go to the Piazza, I
long to see how she bears her humor; haste you home, Diego, and tell my Sister
I am arrived; have either of you seen the Girl lately


Not since the last feast, she comes not in the Prado.


You shall dine with me to day if you be not engaged, because we will talk the
Town over, and her news


Faith, and there have been some changes since you went will make you confess
all are not guilty of ove-rconstancy, that despised, old, out-of-fashion virtue


'TWas they and Don Pedro, which it seems is newly arrived from the Army.


Prithee stay till they are gone out of sight; those hungry Dons will think to
make a meal with us else upon the remnant of their Sabbaths days dinner


They have my curse that made the decree against Jews; my lean Portugese
pretends Christianity now, and does so devour my Bacon; a flitch, heretofore,
would have lasted him as long as the old Law


Would the Army were drawn into Garrison; I long for some fresh Lovers to dress
our house; these grow so withered and poor they scarce keep Cobwebs from before
our mouths, which they break with lean bits, God knows; mine only sighs of
late, and in Poetry whynes his passion; I told him last night I could neither
feed nor cloth my self with Anagrams, or Sonnets; but desired him to let his
Pen alone, and express himself with his Purse; so he gave me this Ring, and I
returned him his Ode again


And there is Shittlecock, Cork and Feather too, their Patron and Comrade
together, Don Pedro, now he is returned; we shall have all their visits in the
afternoon, for fear of the charges of a meal


My life upon it, they are gone to the Piazza to see the Picture and the
Petti-coats of the Italian; if I had thought any man so mad as to give such a
sum, we could have taken that course too; I hate the whores impudence for
setting such a price upon her self, and undervaluing all us by raising the
Market upon the opinion of her own flesh, as if we sold Carrion only


It Is the humor of most men, they love difficulty and price; slight them,
they are yours for ever, Riches and a fair House, Plate, Jewels and Furniture,
Petti-coats too; Death, they will make love to Petty-coats; nay, some Fools Court
Quality a great Lady, though she stink above the Allay of Amber; One that never
goes to Bed, all, nor sleeps in a whole Skin, One whose Teeth, Eyes and hair
rests all night in a Box, and her Chamber lies strewn with her loose members,
High shoes, false Back, and Breasts; while he hugs a dismembered Carcass, such
as is fitter for an Antiquaries study then a Lovers Arms


Peace, and hide close, what are these?


It Is a proper Fellow, would I had Opportunity to tell him so; has he not
something of the English Colonel in his face


He has, and they are strangers; and strangers are our Plumbs.


And we their Wine and Banquets.


What do you mean? S'life, affront a Lady! prithee be Civil.


Pox on it, there is no Jest in abusing Ladies; We that are strangers to be first
known by a Barbarous insolence toward Women!


Why, good homespun, honest, ignorant Country Gentlemen, what do you think
these were


Why, we see by their Mien, what they were, some Ladies, Persons of Quality,
going privately to their devotion; you see they are entered the Church


These two are Ten whores in Essex.


Prithee speak softly; this rude humor of Scandalizing Women is ugly, and we
shall be beaten for being in your Company


Pray, Master Justice, give me your warrant; and if I do not prove them Whores,
whip me


This humor is worn old and stale, and to me as troublesome as straight Boots,
or sore Eyes


A king Teeth, a Salt Itch, a tired Horse, or a gal'd Arse; Death, will you
believe me when you lie with her? It Is strange Logic because your Bond is
better then mine, I must not know Spain better then you; I Will be your Baud but
I Will satisfy this scruple


Do you hear? I shall be an unbeliever too, if I thought you would give such
satisfaction to all that have weak faiths in this point; for if these be of
that Gentle-craft, I Will not give six pence for an honest woman for my use


Yes, Sir, they are right, though they will neither be drunk take Tobacco, nor
speak Bawdy; these will not swear neither, and yet they are whores; in all those
fine Clothes and Jewels, which are their own, and right ones too; No bright
blazing Bristow's amongst those Diamonds; These are sweet too, and wear clean
Linen; None of your Roostlings, that lie in Cock-lofts, in the Suburbs; These
have houses in the City, and lie in Beds, and in sheets as large as those Beds,
which no Rug adorns, nor yellow Curtains stained with some Martyrs Story,
without; and all to be hanged, and pinned like a Frippery, within; no Sea-coal,
Faggots, nor fowl dishes, with broken bread, lying under their Beds: yet they
are wenches


Prithee, where do these Lady whores live?


Where no Constable, lousy Watchman, Beadle, or Saucy Bell-man dares break
into their Chambers; These will not be kicked neither; nor suffer your Blades,
inspired with Sack, to break their Windows; These are not of Turnbal-Street, I
dare assure you; For their feet do not stink neither; yet they are doxies, and
shall be yours; or I Will be subject to your Character, of barbarous and rude


Nay, nay.


A pox on these English humors, you come abroad to learn, and yet take it ill
to be informed; Do you think the wise world will spend their fortunes
al'Inglese, where you must pray, and pay, and not be suffered to tell neither;
Hear you cannot injure a Woman more then to conceal her kindness, nor give a
greater glory to a Mistress, then by describing handsomely every part, and
lively painting every Beauty of her Body, and her heart; who hides or conceals
his Mistress favor here calls her ugly, or unsound; If you doubt what I say,
follow them to the Church, and try your Fortunes


By this hand, such a Wench would pass for a Person of Quality in any County of
England


Few Ladies, I have seen at any Sheriffs Feasts have better Faces, or so good
Clothes; and if these be wenches, such Arguments as these may reconcile me to
this unpromising Town, a place in which if we find not the Bowels, (hight the
Kitchen, and the Cellar) better then the Prospect, or the Seat, I shall swear,
Never King but Ours was ever so betrayed; is this all they can afford him out
of his Sixteen Kingdoms? By this Light, a Smiths Forge, and his Trough, are as
cool as the air, and as deep as the River in the Dog Days


I, that River; What a Devil made them build the Bridge so big?


'Twas in Imitation of the Ancient Romans, who, in their Conquests buried great
Spurs and Bits, big enough to ride and rule Elephants, only to beget
Admiration in succeeding Ages


Two and twenty Arches, over a Kennel of Snow water! By this hand, there is not
stream enough to quench the Mules shoos as they pass; the Coach wheels hiss as
they drive in it, while Don Phaeton sits in the Box, and Apollo flaming about
his Ears; it is the first River I ever saw Coaches take the Air in


I dare say there are twenty Coaches cast away in it for One Boat; and a
thousand Whores caught in her stream for one Fish, all the Summer long; The
Curso looks like a Sea Triumph; Just so some Inland Painter makes Galatea
sport; if you show us no better Pastime at Madrid then Don Neptune, and Dame
Thetis coach'd in a River, I shall believe you a better Poet, then a Judge; and
sooner read your descriptions then travel your Journal


Those marinated Men and Women were not very Curious to day; Who saw them
bathing in their Pickle; 'Twas like Ovids description, when Phaeton fell;
Me-thought, they looked like those afflicted heads of Rivers, and stood gasping
like run-hounds in thick puddles, half above, and half under water; Meza Cotta,
Meza Rosta per Diana, and then watered high ways; Bless me what a Mountebank art
thou, to praise this Nest of Turds which are laid with a kind of Pride, in such
Order, at Every man's door


Have you done? if not, I have so much pity and patience as will hear you out.


Done? No, by this light, as long as my Arms burn and itch thus; I Will as soon
stand Centry till my Pike grow in my hand, as put my self naked again in the
power of their Inbeds; I would not suffer such another night for their Indies;
By this light, a Leager Osteria Louse bites as venomous as a mad Dog, and then
a new vermin called Punesies, more offensive then Garden Toads, or house
Spiders in our Country; a Gnat here wounds like a Scorpion; a Be not only
stings, but stabs as mortally as a poisoned Dagger, and would destroy the
People, were it not for Relics and Madonas's that protect them


Prithee let us forget these Calamities; and if it be possible save our selves
by a wise and early retreat; a Town Quoth you! I have seen the Dust fly in many
Towns; But I never saw Dust crawl but in Madrid, enlive^ed Dust, part Moor,
part Castilian, all Lowse


Essex has none of these Grievances.


No, by this hand, it is Paradise to this; and our Oysters are worth their
pearl, but this is from our business now; Either let us follow, and take our
Fortunes; I have marked those partridges, let us find them, or the Ambassadors
house


To let you see I have more kindness then you deserve, I Will do either; yet I
would willingly call Arrigo, at the Ambassadors, to witness what wretched
things you would have been if you had ^in seven years longer sleep'd in Ale and
Beef broth at Croyden


Prithee do not name those savory things; you know, there is no Jesting with my
Stomach, it sleeps now; but if it wakes, woe be to all Our shares at the
Ordinary


It Is in this street; see, there are the Arms.


Who would you speak with, Friend?


Old England still, Gown and Staff: I warrant he would not have a Swisse seen
at his Lords Door, for a Rose Noble; Friend, I would speak with Don Arrigo, if
he be at home


He is at home, Sir, you are sure; for it is Noon; This is an Englishman you may
swear; how they are bred! Knock at an Ambassadors door at Meals


Pray tell him, here are some Friends of his would speak with him.


His servant is already gone, they are in good Clothes; yet they look as if
they had rather eat with him; Sir, I shall tell him


How now, why do you shut the door upon us?


Friend, this is no time to leave the Gate open; it is noon in the Ambassadors
Kitchen, and the silver dishes are loose about the house; besides, if I should
let the steam out, there would be such a swarm of Castillians at the door,
feeding upon it, here were no living; Alas, Sir, we are forced to shut up all
when the pot is uncovered; and if you have not dined I advise you to retire,
lest the smell overcome your Stomach, in this pure Air; These are a Nation of
the finest clean Teeth; if they use their Swords no oftener, a Scabbard would
last an Age


Prithee what Countryman art thou, that put'st so many R's into thy English?


A Britain, Sir, Glamorgan-shire, Srie, and Dam.


Take heed, do know what thou have done, to ask a Welshman what Countryman he
is? By this light, it is ten to one but he falls into a fit of Heraldry or
Genealogy, and then you have brought your self into a fair nooze, to be bound
to hear, how many aps, and ap Williams, e're he comes to Adam ap Munmoth


Gentlemen to speak with me, and why do you keep them at the door? My Friend,
the Wanton Wanderer still; what


Salute my Friends, and then I Will answer you; They are true blades, Hall. --
Remnants of the broken Regiments; Royal and Loyal Fugitives, highly guilty all
of the Royal Crime, Poor and honest, Hall; you see his Majesty's marks upon us,
English, and that gave us a safe Conduct, and here we are to snuff our wits


The same man still; I see, Winning nor losing can ^ange your humor; you must
wander still


The same, self-same still, and would not change for all the Sun has shown; or
the Sea hid; I would not be the Catholic King, confined to one place, one
company, one any thing, nor marry the Infanta, though she had as many Graces as
Nature could crowd into one Woman and be faithful; Change, change, Hal, of
Places, Clothes, Wine, Women, Faces; It Is the great and surprising Pleasure,
variety is the Soul of Pleasure, a good unknown, and we want faith to find it


Yet there is one exception to your rule, a secret which we'll discourse of at
leisure; And I believe a Woman that may purchase you from this life, in whose
Embraces you may find such varieties of Joy, as you may keep your Humor and
your Faith too


Who, me? I will not be tied to one Woman, Hall, for all the sword has wonn or
lost; All that Love has given, or Lust has cost, all that Treason has bought or
sold, could it be told down; I would not sell my freedom of that of span of
days that is left me, for it all; I am no Mutton to be folded, Nor Bird to
sing, though in a golden cage: Home, Hal, is all this to me, till in a Grave,
I Will not be found at home; I am resolved those tame Spirits that can be
conjured into a wedding Ring, and dance in that dull Matrimonial circle all
their days, I pity their Bodies that must suffer this slavery, and despise
their lean starved Souls that threw them into those Chains


We are of one Country, though not of one Mind; I Would name my Prison as you call
it, and sing all my days; Yet I have seen the world too, and know a face would
reclaim a wilder Heart then yours


Tell not me of faces, Child; when I wink and call to mind the thousand
beauteous volumnes these Eyes have read over, whose stories I can scarce
remember, though we set marks under their Peti-coats; Think not then a face can
bind me, when her arms could not; My Heart will digest a Mistress in a night,
and hunger again next morning; Surfeit to day of Youth and Beauty, and yet
thirst all night for a new Friend; and those are the strong healthy stomack'd
Lovers that thrive upon Love; A pox on your whining, sighing, Consumptive
Platonic humors, your waterdrinkers, they cannot believe it, Hal, they
cannot; else they would too, and only out of craft insinuate themselves to
make their weakness seem Virtue


Gentlemen, he is your Comrade; and though I will not pretend to know him
better then you, yet I dare say, he does not only doubt our Faith when he
says this, but I am consident he does not believe himself


Sir, we know not what to believe, and yet, for mirth, we let all pass; He is
one has past all Fortunes by Sea and Land; surfets, and want of bread, loved,
and been beloved again, and of that passion has tasted both the honey and the
sting, thrown from his cradle into other men's grounds, naked, and unthought of
by his Parents and Friends, and what was cruelty then, is his happiness now;
for being bred with the wolf he grew wise enough to thrive in the forest


Those miseries set an edge upon his mind, with which he eats through the
difficulties of Fortune, and now emboldned by success doubts nothing; I have
seen him in a morning put his hand as confidently into his pockets for money as
if the Devil had been his cashire, when he knew he put them off at night, as
empty as his gloves


Why, if I had lived at Croydon all my days, I could have found money in my
pocket in the morning, if I had left it there at night; Why, either of you can
fetch a penny loaf for a penny, though you are Country Gentlemen, and if you
can do this, why will you not allow our experience in the other


Pray leave this discourse, and pursue your promise; The Church and the Ladies,
shall we not see those sinners? Prithee let us not lose the occasion, we have
but young Faiths and great doubts; Assure us these are wenches, and we submit,
else we rebel for ever


We are covetous fishermen, and for want of Faith in better luck, would fain
keep these in the Net; Prove these Merchants of Love and his small ware, and we
are ready to be cozened; A Heart, a piece or so we have to spend, and if they
be kind, I care not how quickly I Am undone


Who are these they speak of?


Our old Friends the two Sisters, that passed by even now; I staid Paulina, but
she did not know me, yet she looked earnestly; A perriwig and seven years
misery, will change a wiser Man then I pretend to be


I left them in the Church just now, if they desire to see them a Credo's time
ill spent will satisfy that curiosity; Will you go, or shall I lead you the
way? Come, I Will be your guide so you do not mistake it for the Welsh-man in me


Come lead, and we'll follow you without this Apology.


THey are strangers, I know by their staring, and English, by Don Harrigo; If
he has metal he follows me, and if I have wit he is mine; for they say it is a
kind hearted Nation, when they come first abroad; But frequent ill usage
hardens their Hearts, a People that loves every thing, even themselves, and so
kind to their Mothers Son, that they believe all women are so too; If this be
one of that foolish Family, I shall so fit him for a Mistress. See, here comes
Sanco, now, the news, where is he


Gazing upon the two Sisters, they have formerly known one of them; It Is the
English Major that served here under Don Pedro's Father, he went hence in the
beginning of the rebellion; You know him, he was Paulina's Servant, a wild
fellow


It Is he, I thought I had seen him, Thomaso, it is Don Thomaso; But let him
pass, how goes our own business, did you speak with the other


There was no fear of that, for you no sooner left your seat, but he flew to
me; I find by his wheeling, he is an old Cock of the game, he will follow strait
and come alone, he would not let his company see us talk together; I am to
expect him here, haste you home, and put on your best face


Tell him, I am in Love with him, and Daughter, Mistress, or Wife, to some
great person; Lament in my behalf the sad condition of a Woman of quality in
this Nation, whose jealous customs will admit no occasions for Men to make
their addresses to us, which exposes us thus to their censure, forced against
the modesty and custom of our Sex to speak first; But were we so blessed to
enjoy the liberty of other happy Nations, where Men and Women meet and converse
without scandal --


What large heads, and herds of Cuckolds would Spain breed?


Leave fooling now, I am serious, say this in defense of my modesty, and that I
beg he will not mistake my desires of seeing him; whose Eyes have taken such
venom from his, as nothing but the Scorpion can cure the Scorpions wound; This
secret tell him, I blush to you, my Friend and Kinsman; This, and some very
very fine things, such as fools use to be tickled and taken with, Dear Sanco


This is fine, by St. Iago, I could find in my heart to forswear your service;
Death, have I taught you your Trade to become my Mistress? Do I wear a sword,
am I a Castillian, and shall a foolish Peti-coat, a shallow Woman, tell me
what is to be said or done, to cousen a dull greesy brained phlegmatic
Tramontano, how often have I brought you dead dogs for visits? When I do, give me
the tail for my pains; Till then, play your own part, go home, and attend your
Q and leave me to guide this small vessel to your Port


I am gone and will expect you.


These Girls with good faces, have the true magnetic virtue, and if a Man be
a Blade, his steel will incline to them; I am but a scurvy Philosopher, else,
me thinks a Man might prove the Lodestone; and the steel, the Fornication of
the Earth, sure we are, there is a he and she in that Mass; and why not these
the two Sexes? But observe how kindly she takes it to be plowed too, and the
deeper you put in the spade or culture, the sweeter; If I could read, perhaps I
might find some odd book would prove this further. At the Gate I Will stay for
him


WHat dull things were we not to know him? yet I am to be excused; But for you
to forget a Man that had got your Maidenhead, what will thy Memory retain


I confess he was not in my thoughts; the absence of seven years, that beard
and Perriwig, all conspired against me; yet I am glad to see him, he keeps his
old humor still


Thou love him, and I do not know for which of the two Reasons best; whether
for taking thy Maidenhead, or giving thee Plums; it is much what seasoning will
do, those kindnesses will taste still; else, to me he is none of those men I
could dye for, or live with; there is too much of the Curd, and Dutchman in
him; he is too white for my eye; if I were to take my choice of the three, the
black should be he, I love the Raven in a man; those Pigeons do nothing but
bill and prune themselves; nay, they expect a woman should Court them; and when
they are won there goes such a deal of care for fear of spoiling them; Hang
them, they cannot last a nights watch, nor stand the shock of a day of Battle


The Raven do thou love? the Raven then pursue thy choice, for he looks as if
he were right Ravens Chick, a Bird that any Carrion will please as well as
Venison; I am glad to find we shall not be Rivals, take your Crow, give me my
Dove; there is beauty, youth and sweetness in him; a flower fit to be worn in a
Ladies bosom; yet, if I mistake not, I have seen as stout and as high flying
Hawks of the gray Male as any of your Kite-colour; would he were at home to try
if I could get my Maidenhead from him again


Why truly the man is civil; and it is odds but he will be persuaded to leave it
where he had it after seven years use; it is almost as long as thou kept'st it


And yet if you had not been weary of it first, I believe he had not had it so
soon


Faith, as good I sell it while 'twas there; for I was afraid thou would
have played with it till thou had lost it thy self


It made me a friend then, I do not know what he is now; and though they have
an ill name in the world this last seven years, for bloody and cruel; yet I
never saw any of them that were not kind, well natured, and frank to their
Mistress


An improvident sullen race of men, that will spend or give a hundred pound
rather then pay five shillings; governed by a nature cross to all other
Nations, I have known them take a kick from a stranger, and kill one another
for a wry look; they are governed by no Rules; either impudent beyond
Mountebanks, or else blushing sneakers, bashful as Girls in the Novitia; I
know nothing good in them but their humor of giving to their shirts when they
drink


If I mistake not the Nation, you have made but an ill observation; Dull and
Phlegmatic as you believe them; their acquaintance will tell you Don Thomaso
has no such fool in his forehead as you read there; step before, I see they
follow us


SEE, there they go; halt a little, and give them law enough; the Course will
be the fairer


Not too much law, pray; consider, it is but a Puppy-lover that runs.


Gentlemen, whilst your mirth has so good a jest as this in chase, I am
contented with any part of the sport


Where is Edwardo?


He has lodged a Deer of his own; I saw him steal out of the Church, and follow
a good woodman that gave him the sign


Why so, there is one of the Covey flown; if I were to give an account of him
to his Parents now, 'twere fine; to cry a lost English Boy of thirty, 'twould
be welcome news to his friends if he had any; this it is to travel with a
Justice of peace, when he is out of his Clerks sight that keeps him in awe; the
Rogue was only hedged in with the fear of his neighbors, and the Penal
Statutes at home; now he is brok loose he runs neighing like a Ston'dhorse upon
the Common; I hope she will find him a young Traveller, and dress him fit for our
mirth, that we may have a revenge


If she be a practiced sinner, he is fitted; perhaps, she will sell him to the
Spirits that take up Planters for the Indies, or flea and beat him; and then
turn him out to seek his fortune; what humor is he of that he runs thus wildly
alone


What humor is he of, he runs thus wildly alone? an English elder Brother's
humor, bred in a Nursery with a Bib and Muckander, and a Maid to tend him till
he was in his Teens; one that knew no joy beyond a Birds-nest, Angling, or a
Play-day at twenty; one that is whipped in a Free School, and would cry and
scramble for Nuts till he was out of his Wardship, and lay with his Grandam
till he was married; A pox upon him, h'as all our money about him; and if she
rob him she plunders the party


Never fear him, he has a sufficient ill nature to defend him; beside the
blessing of pride and self-love; which will save our moneys from any danger his
bounty may threaten; Marry if she should profess love to him, and can persuade
him handsomely to believe it, there is some danger; else, if she get above his
Ducat, geld him


That Is no good ground you go upon, 'twill not save him there; these women are
none of those tenderhearted Lovers you find in Comedies, that sigh at first
sight; and run mad for strangers in the second acts if he go into her house she
has all she desires; and will either pluck his Plums by flattery, or else so
shake and cudgel the Tree, he will be glad to let them fall; then that Rogue you
saw entertain him, and talk with such gravity in the Church, is her Pimp, and a
Bravo; a slave condemned to the Galleys for more murders then he has Beads upon
his Rosary


For beating him, I Will venture that; and it is odds but he will beat some of them
if they speak twice without respect or beyond his knowledge; the Rogue is stout
enough, and 'twill be as hard to beat as please him; but let him pass and tell
me, Ferdinando, how do you like these visions? I am for Saretta, it is a brave
plump Girl, there is substance in her; her heart has room to dance and play in
her breast; the Rogues soul lies soft and white; and in these Dog Days to lie in
her arms is sleeping in Fresco; your lean women in the Summer burn like kindled
Char-coal, I must find some means to purchase a sin, or so with her. Come, let
us go see them


THis is the Picture of the Angellica Paduana, that was Mistress to the dead
General; her friendship is not to be purchased under a thousand Crowns a
month, for which her Lover is Master four days and nights each week and she
his Servant

Angellica Bianca Paduana.

SEE, they are come; prithee observe, with what malice and envy yon women look
upon us


They are vexed to find the Trade so refined by a stranger; alas, they have no
ambitions here, but to secure an Olio to dinner, and a Coach to the Prado; a
pound of Bacon, and a Royal of eight transports them; would our conclusion were
tried that we might return to Venice; if ever you be tempted to leave that
Paradise again, may some mangey Don ride us through Madrid; 'twill be another
condition now with us, you have youth and fortune to spare, you may look about
and choose your man to make a friend at leisure; we can eat now without being
forced to sell our liberties but upon our own conditions


I would not stay a meal in this Town; but for the vanity and pleasure, to see
and be seen; while the General lived, his jealousy made me lie hid in the
world, neither seen nor enjoyed; chaster then their Nunneries had my mind been
as innocent as his Bed. Profit and to be sought was all my pleasure then, with
which profit I will seek my pleasure now; the doubtful world searce believed I
was handsome: thus I shall remove that doubt, and leave a name and memory
behind me; the novelty and humor, besides the price, will beget discourse; I
know there is few will give the money, though he is not born shall enter under;
for though I want no money, I Will have the gusto to see them gaze, sigh and wish
for what they have not the hearts to purchase, nor merit to deserve, gratis;
and when our nine days wonder's over, we will begone; and in our own Sphere enjoy
all our souls can imagine of peace and pleasure; get the Theorbo, I see some
coming


Now Comrade, what are the conditions we must submit to before we can spend an
hour in conversation with your Lady? I am her Countryman


Sir, be pleased to read that Paper, 'twill inform you.


A thousand crowns! Cape Bella per Dio, Ma Cara.


What said they?


He Is of Millain, Madam, and would fain have seen you; but they say a thousand
crowns is dear, though you are fair


Is he of Millain? would I had known it, the price should have been two
thousand Crowns, to him, for his Generals sake


Ha, the Furb has a mind to give horns to his Generals Ghost; see here comes
more men, but I fear no Merchants


What Is this? a thousand Crowns! sure it is a mistake.


Not at all, Sir, a thousand Crowns is the least price.


Does she give or take so much by the month?


One as soon as the other, there is two O's mistaken sure, a thousand Crowns,
pray is she not mad? thou have black-lead, prithee write it down, there are so
few good Whores in Madrid, that an Italian holds at a thousand Crowns a month;
the next Merchandise we bring shall be every man a tame Whore; a thousand
crowns? why it is a portion for the Infanta, and a good one too, if we keep
Catalonia, and Massaniello Naples. There Is nothing to be paid for seeing your
sight, is there?


What said they?


They were of opinion the Painter had put in an o or two too much, and asked me
whether you gave or took a thousand Crowns a month? they were merry, and said,
'twas a portion for the Infanta, and more then the Catholic King gave with his
Sister now in France


They look, indeed, as if they wanted a service and wages, but not such a
Mistress


A Mistress! a Livery would be more useful, or a Laundress; what Linen they
wear! Boots and no Cloaks in Madrid; Monsieur! monster, you should have asked
them what Trade they were of


You may see by their Mien they are of the Gania petits the poor people
expected so long; and we shall find them by the stink the rusty Bacon leaves in
the Town; their Linen's hired by the month, you will not find two shirts in a
Family; and for smocks they have no such word in their language; they prize a
woman! their Curtezans dare not show their faces; their Prince will beat his
Whore; they are seldom paid, but always robbed when they come amongst them; how
they would demolish our Trophee, if it stood upon the new Bridge, in spite of
old Halls Ghost in Brass, though he were a friend to the Petti-coat


No, faith, never think they should bear respect to their dead King, since they
do not do it to their living; the three Christian Kings are so used by their
vassals; Frondeur, Roundhead, and a Massaniellian; which is the worst devil of
the three


There Is no Rogue like your Roundhead, a dissembling, insolent, bloody,
blasphemous traitor; whose originals were never got between sheets, nor lay
under one, but the Sextons, in charity; Rogues that had of right only a grave a
piece, in those three Kingdoms, which they so long reigned over. -- See more
Sons of wonder, Gazers, though no buyers


No matter, I have my humor in their wonder; when we are gone, this will live
upon their Stage; and be a Theme for a thousand discourses; all which are
Trophies to that vanity which pleases women


But a thousand crowns! would I had passed here before I went to Rome; I could
have had her as cheap in my Bed as a Coach in the street; would she would take
bills upon my friends, I Would give her two thousand


Only ready money passes here; there is no credit, Sir, in this Trade.


Let Us go lie privately two or three months at Salamanea till my bills come,
and then return


Or till the King pays me, and then I Will furnish.


Well, and how?


Why these are kind-hearted, civil men, but out of Cash; but if you will take
Bills of Exchange to Cracovia, or assignments upon the moving Scotch Factory in
Poland, the Prince is your man; or if you will deal upon Account to be paid
when Brabanter gets his money of the King, he is all te mall your servant


Wishes will not drive our Mill, though I confess I am not displeased with him
that would buy if he could. -- See some one to steal because he cannot
purchase, how they are hid in their cloaks! she will catch all; see how he stalks
to the Bird; fear not, Sir, she will sit still till you shoot; what! they are dumb


Yes, but I know them; it is Don Pedro and his old Comrades.


Don Pedro! his Father died last Spring and left him a Million; it is the same
that was wont to vex us with inquiries


Is this he? I have known him beset the street as if an Inquisidor had been
hunting a Jew; if I guess right, he is likely to purchase one month of idle
time


He is rich, and I believe frank enough; but they say he is of an insolent and
froward nature, and so jealous he will neither lead nor drive, a proud valuer
of himself; let us be gone before he return; some men are got with shadows, and
some birds with chaff; others that are wiser will have the corn in the sheaf;
and Don Pedro is observed to be a better Lover in a window, then in a bed, and
will give as much to be rid of a Mistress, as to purchase her; therefore I am
resolved nothing but his golden-key shall let him in


They Are gone, and we will even turn our Lady to the wall, and to dinner; I am of
opinion this bait will catch no fish; I Would be loath my wages should be deducted
out of the first fruits of this project


What is it to us, whether it thrive, or no, so we are paid? the sooner she
finds her fool we are casher'd; and though it be but a dull trade to stand
watching of shadows; yet it is better then bread and match, a frozen naked
Sentinel in Flanders


Nay, I am not so wanton as not to taste the sweet of feeding well, for
nothing; it is a Crown of Plate a day, easily gained, to be a Knight of her
Post; but I fear that remedy will cure her fit sooner then good counsel; two
crowns a day hardly earned will quickly appear a dear price for folly, and
quench the heat that bred this opinion of her own face. By this hand, she
should have got more in a Booth with the Elephant, for two pence a piece


Pray let us in, and keep up the humor, rail at and despise the Spanish
avarice that knows not how to employ their Indies to the right use; and be sure
to admire her beauty; vain women are ships that sail only with windy flattery


It Is the same by all descriptions; is she handsome?


Esteemed one of the most Garbato in the Town, virtuous, young, and a high
flyer is her character; but I have no practice with her, I am now going that
way, and I Will inform my self particularly; Gentlemen, your humble servant; Don
Thomaso, I hope, when I can be serviceable unto you or your friends you will
command me


Lucetta do you call her?


Yes, Lucetta, and her house is near the Jesuits.


No words, pray, that we know any thing of his haunt; he is a young man, but
time will reclaim him


Prithee, who is this that knows all the world? By this light, he has described
Edwardo as if they had lain in a Belly; h'as a shrewd memory; I Will take heed
how I promise him any thing; but I fear his credit is not so good as his
observation; for though he be a blade, his scabbard's old; how he eat at
dinner! if his heart be as good as his stomach he is a brave fellow; prithee,
what is he


It Is a fellow of a most temperate soul; one that makes his own humors his
slaves, and himself a slave to all other men's; I have known him long and in
diverse Countries, a kind admirer still of the place and people he was in; as if
it had been his own Country or Family; and it is thought he can live in all
Countries but that he was born in; one of his maxims is, No man has wit that
cannot be what he will, upon all occasions, in all companies, and in all
conditions; Harrigo knows him better then I


By this character you are no stranger to him; this is he that traveled with a
young Lord, a Countryman of ours, till he spent and sold even his name, for he
was feign to change it; 'twas not current where they past; and at last were
forced to hide themselves in Pilgrims weeds, and beg devoutly home


What could he say after such an action? methinks he should fly the
conversation of men


I met him in that condition; and he told me, 'twas for devotion, a penance
they had vowed for a great deliverance in Germany


What? they fell from the Butt at Heydelberg, or stumbled into another of
Bachrac


No, but miraculously delivered from a party of Swedes that robbed them; but
had you heard him gravely applaud the humor of such who voluntarily put
themselves into those private habits; so by a Philosophical hiding a man's self
to peep and spy upon the world through a cranny, as it were, the only best way
to see and judge the true natures of men, who commonly are more free and unbent
before the despised poverty of such whose eyes and opinion, as cheap and low
things, they esteem not


But when his Baits take, or the merry bill comes, then it is true the plain
Clothes show the sober solid man; yet abroad, the habit and the mien
distinguish the Persons; and for his part he has found it an Advantage still,
to look like some body, and good Clothes pays us in respects, and observation,
what they cost in the reckoning; so, long hair is comely, till it falls; Then
short Civiller, and less subject to disorder with a Beard sometimes in the
Greek-Mode, rough and unhewn, sometimes Spanish-Biggateroes starched to his
Ears, and upon a sudden, those formidable Whiskers reduced to a pair of
Eyebrows, and those plucked with Pincers, till they stare like Pallizadoes, or
a row of Pins; These things he will suffer, and be rather thought out of his
Wits, then out of the Fashion; but see who comes to break off our discourse


Thomaso, Ferdinando, Harrigo?. Your hands all, and as you are kind friends get
me a dark room, and clean straw, before this flood of Joy and pleasure oppress
my Brain; Ferdinando, hark you, will you buy any Land at Croyden? I Will sell you
all, by this light, house and woods uncounted, and at an under rate too; for so
much saved here is so much got there, and here I Will build my Tabernacle;
Thomaso, thou art a kind Friend, thou have Wit and Judgment, and know how
to choose; I have been an Ass, and Cozened all my days, but my Eyes are
opened, and I repent, and ask thee pardon for abusing thee, and the place;
Ferdinando, such a Mistress, so handsome, so kind, and full of all those
Beauties the curious eye and kind heart seeks, and all for Love; She sighed,
and smiled, and kissed, then sighed again, and wrings my hand, sure it is a
dream; yet her Arms methinks hang here still; Prithee try if thou can taste
her kisses; The Odor and the dew I taste them still upon my lips; I never felt
such a melting Snowy Girl; All her kindness, with such a Grace, such a Majesty,
such Crowds of pleasures in her Arms, I could scarce crawl from betwixt them;
And from her door to her Bed but two steps in Love; What wretches were we to
come so late abroad; Now Thomaso's discriptions taste; Now I savor his
discourse, and by this One dish can judge of those Feasts of pleasure which We
use to listen to as Romance; Ferdinando, If thou will be happy sell all, and
let us two plant here


Not all; Keep the Birch-wood to jerk this Joy, it is too hot to hold, Ned; yet
I rejoice you have so good Luck, a Mistress that you dare tell of her kindness,
it seems, your Spanish Loves enjoin no ungrateful Secrecies; No troublesome
Honor, to throw Thorns in a Lovers way; She fits thy humor, who had as lieve
be publicly pox'd, as privately hapy; do you know her Name


Her Name? no not I. What matter is it for her Name, a kind young and handsome
Woman; what a pox shall a man do with more names then these? I shall not marry
her


What did you give her?


What did I give her? What do you think she is to be bought? No, Sir, Edwardo
is not every body; give her? Why, are we in stock to buy such a Woman? No, not
to purchase a kiss; give her? by this light she gave me this Chain for the
foolish Diamond you saw me wear, and then such Wine; 'twas a Present sent her
by that Grandee you saw me speak to in the Church; he is a civil, well bred man
too, I warrant him; I am engaged to sup there to night


We Will go with you.


Not a soul; No Gentlemen, you are of the Wits; I Will follow mine own fortune,
and when I have suffered Loves violence for a Night, Ten or Twenty, then I care
not if you do see her; But not a kiss till I have surfeited


After all this Joy I would be certain your Purse were safe; You know it is all
our Stock; Come, pray impart; it is no time to venture all our Fortunes, in one
Bottom, especially when you are resolved to sail without a compass


Here, Take part, or all, if you will; useless Trifles now to me that can
command such a Girl, and her full Fortune; Don Harrigo, pray favor me with
your Servant, to buy my Supper, and to choose the wine


How the Infidel is turned Idolater! and he that would believe no Woman
faithful now believes and dotes upon a Common whore, she works like a crafty
one; and if she be right Spaniard she will discover some of the old Serpent in
her


Never fear it, Ferdinando; It Is but the malice of men, that disperse those
scandals, to brand the Nation; what time of day is it? I have not dined


Marry, you must feed; Venus will have Bacchus and Ceres too; Else you will be
but cold Company


I begin to believe the Rogue has met a Fortune, however, h'as tasted of her
and her Bottle; would I had such an one to cousen me too; of all the Love I
could spare to Night


Hark you, Ferdinando, be patient, and answer me; have you observed such a
scarcity of men in the streets as to believe a handsome young Woman need run
Rampant for want of a man? or do you see any such temptation in Edwardo, that
he should make a wench choose him out of Fifteen Kingdoms, to offer up her youth
and beauty for nothing? Observe me, she will abuse him


ANna, what musing! give me the Theorbo.


I was thinking what sullen Star reigned at your Birth, that has preserved your
youth from being in Love, that green sickness of the heart that vexes all our
Sex, early or late


A kind and a thrifty star, to which I owe my chief happiness; yet there are
Natural Reasons too; For, to speak ingenuously, how should I become a Lover
that have not so much leisure as to wish or long for any man; All I see are
offered before I asked; I have refused many, and enjoyed more, but never yet
desired one since I parted with my first Friend


Nay, I Am clearly of Opinion, love thrives more in a Monastery then in a
Court; A Nunnery with a high wall and double grate, there Loves grows mighty
and Imperious; What would those Prisoners give for the Crumbs of Lovers, that
sigh and fall from your Bed; the Table where Love banquets either refused or
surfeited


Did thou observe, the other day, how the poor Girls crowded to the Grates
when we came in


Yes, and 'twas easy to read their Curses in their looks, that darted poison
at us; Their eyes were ponyards in their wishes, for envy of that life which we
loathe as much as they Covet to taste


It Is sad to see youth and beauty so betrayed, condemned and forced by Covetous
Parents to wither in those shades; Roses in their prime of Beauty, of Force to
have led Nations in Triumph; Their Sighs and Tears have Rage and Pity in them;
how they beat themselves against the grate, like old sullen Birds put lately in
Cages


It Is a misery I have been acquainted with; and I wonder no State has been so
Curious as to condemn some young Malefactor to be thrown naked into a Nunnery;
you talk of your Royal Chaces, and Jocodotories; I had rather see a Kennel of
Nuns worry a Friar of twenty, then all the Boars lanch'd in the Forest


Bless the man so condemned; as good thrown in the Lions Den; how that
Novitia's teeth would water, whose turn 'twas to read a Chapter while the
Abbess tastes his forbidden Fruit


What have we here? New men? No, it is the same Dumb Crew; would they were
condemned to the Experiment for walking thus muffled in the Dog Days; if he
continues he will be baked in his own Oven; That Scarlet in August looks
Red-hot, and it is enough to set ones eyes on fire this Month; he is poisoned,
I see by his swelling so; so, do, do, gaze; yes, yes, it is she; compare them
together


It Is an Excellent Picture, whose hand can it be?


Van Dikes, and it is well done.


He was a great Master, and a Civil Penoil.


Why, do you think he has flattered her?


By Saint Jago, he cannot; Observe her without prejudice; Is there one Grace,
one beauty more then she set before his Eyes? And softness, such as pencils
cannot reach; That smile, there is a grace and sweetness in it Titian could
never have caught


Why do you hide your head then, when you know there is thousand sweetnesses are
to be sold, Three for a Crown? Were I Don Pedro, I would Resolve that Question
e're my Month were out; it is true, kindness is the best sauce, I know, to
Beauty, and will increase, nay beget an appetite; But sure, He that loves a
Woman, if her face prove not his sauce his stomak's ill, and your scruple
should never trouble me; To have shut out Don Pedro, and now let in his Money


No more, they observe us; she has her Theorbo in her hand, I hope she will sing.


See, Our Merchants are returned, and new ones are arrived; what are these?


Strangers by their Colors, and their Clothes; some Officers from the Army.


See, we are upon the place; Now observe with what Gravity and Decorum Whoring
is settled here; By virtue of the Inquisition, in this most Catholic Country


That pillar, what is it? a whipping Post? it is the first gilded one I have seen.


They are very neat, to paint and gild their Gallows; See, there is a picture
upon it, it is some body hanged in Effigies


That wonder is it I told you of; it is the picture of the famous Italian, the
Angellica; See, she is now at her Window


I see her, it is a lovely Woman; hark, I hear a Theorbo, is she Musical?


Judge by what you hear; These are the two Sisters in the other Window, and
that is the Polack Prince with the Saretta


Peace, she will Sing; What a Garb she has? A Thousand Crowns? By this Day, a
thousand Kingdoms were not dear; a pox of this poverty, it is always heavy upon
these Occasions, where no virtues can make a man's way. Bread and water I can
digest in a furrow upon a Rendevouz, and sleep in it, without thoughts of Envy,
till an Alarm wake me; And then start up from among those Clouds, when the
Trumpet sounds, as if 'twere Doomsday; Custom and Honor, Hall, makes that
sufferance nothing; Nor has ambition or Fortune any Beauties, that tempt me;
But as they can purchase Beauty, which we see set at a Rate, like Flesh in the
Shambles, and spoiled too, like that, by ill Cooks


Hark, she Sings.


COme hither, you that Love, and hear me sing of joys still growing;
Green, Fresh, and Lusty, as the pride of Spring, and ever blowing.
Come hither Youths that blush, and dare not know what is desire;
And Old men, worse then you, that cannot blow one spark of fire.
And with the power of my enchanting Song;
Boys shall be able men, and old men young.
Come hither you that hope, and you that cry, leave off complaining.
Youth, Strength and Beauty, that shall never die, are here remaining.
Come hither Fools, and blush, you stay so long, from being blessed.
And mad men, worse then you, that suffer wrong, yet seek no rest.
And in an hour, with my enchanting Song,
You shall be ever Pleased, and ever Young.
How now? what would you have, Sirrah?


What Insolence is this? Death, I Will not suffer it.


Stay a little and observe; you see they are strangers, and perhaps it is
Ignorance


What does the Ruffian mean?


Why do you take down the Picture? restore it, or we shall force it.


How now Rascal? Sirrah, put up your sword, and quickly, do you hear? or by
this light I Will draw mine


Why this violence, Sir! what right have you to this Picture, more then another?


Possession; and I Will keep it; you, perhaps, have money enough to purchase the
Substance; We poor folks must be contented with these shadows, unless she were
to be fought for, and then neither you nor the proudest in Madrid should
out-bid me. Lady, do you grudge


I am confident, Sir, you will; and I am so far from being displeased, that I
shall take it for an Honor you will keep it


Your Servant, Lady, and here I Will wear it; a Buckler against all that dare be
angry, what ere they be.


S' death, shall we suffer this? you are very brave in your words, we'll try
what your sword dares do


Beat us at this sport, and we'll wear swords no more; Why, a Pigeon will fight
for his Hen


Don John, Don Pedro, Don Carlo, what do you mean? Sir, to you that seem to
have some kindness for me, hold, I conjure you by her you love most, by her
that loves you most, I conjure you, hold; They are all deaf, run down, Anna,
make those Villains leave siding and part them


We are lost, undone, you and I, all, all lost and confiscated to the State;
It Is some plot upon you; that Ruffian is set on purpose to destroy you; it is
some damned Soldier hired to this; Those Soldiers, those damned Soldiers;
'twas never a good world since that race of Men and buff grew in fashion; In
peace the Rogues use to sneak from cellar to cellar, and conversed with none
but Alguaziles.


Haste, I say, follow, raise the street, ere they Murder one another; 'Twas
Don Pedro's Insolence that caused this; what pretense had he to question him


Pray let us retreat, before some worse consequence follow; You know, these are
a Nation that will not be affronted


You bleed, are you much hurt?


Not I, it is theirs if there be any blood.


If your Dons fight no better then this, they will never recover Catalonia; why
must he be concerned in taking down the paper


By this light, we'll have the picture too; We have won it in Battle field,
fairly won it; The Knights and Giants are fled that should have defended it:
Come, Ferdinand, lift me; I Will take it down


Hold, Sir; and ere you do me an injuy, give me leave to speak to your Friend;
Sir, as you are a Soldier and a Gentleman, I expect protection from you; It Is
their profession to defend, not injure Women; and I am so far from deserving
ill of you, that I know you not; Yet if you please to come up, I am confident
we shall give you full satisfaction for all the displeasure you can with
Justice imagine me guilty of


You are not mad to put your self into her power? Do you know how many
trap-doors there are in her house, or how many leiger Bravoes lie there


Prithee leave fooling, and let us go to our own lodging; A pox of these gilt
whores: By this light, I Will find as good flesh in Flannel, for a yard of ferret
ribband, as she sells for a thousand Crowns; and a man must fight for it too;
she will cut thy throat


Is it possible you two should know me so little as to be serious in this
point? Not go where a woman calls, a young fair woman, a woman that I love too,
because there may be danger; Death, is there any danger like loving her without
money in her purse, whom nothing but a thousand Crowns can purchase


If that be so why do you lose your labor, and afflict your self with seeing
of her, unless you had the sum to pay


Why, though she may not sell, it may be she may have a fancy to give a
Courtesy; Who knows? I am sure of two kisses, at coming and going


You know that is not the style of this place; she will lie with you as soon as
kiss you


It Is a gallant fellow, and the rest poor spirited things; Fear not, Sir, there
is no danger threatens you; See all the weapons we wear, and if these Eyes do
not wound you, you are safe from women's dangers


Do not mistake this dispute, it is but the kindness of Friends; and if mine own
Eyes brought not more danger by gazing on yours then any Enemy threatens, it is
not your doors could have kept me out; And to remove your doubt, would you
durst meet me as naked in your Bed as I durst enter. Farewell Hal. --


We'll expect you in the next street.


WHy did you pull down the Picture?


Rather, why did you set it up, If not for that purpose? sure you know the
excellence it exposed to our Eyes; which I would now describe, but that the
conversation with your Glass will do it better, which I perceive you have
consulted, by the price you seem to value them at; In short, I saw and loved
you, fair one, as who does not; I wished for you too, as who would not? But
when I read your paper, I found the price of this Jewel too great, not for my
value but my Fortune; had that been equal to my Love, you should have found at
what rate I prized the Beauty and the Friendship of the famous and fair
Angellica, that Star of Italy; who had she been as fixed as bright, a Prince
might have worn such a Jewel in his Breast, and receive greatness and luster
from her; These thoughts my wounded Eyes, and ravished Ears, suggested to me
seeing that Form, and hearing those charms thy hand and voice dispersed
amongst the surpised, and sighing multitude; When guilty of my own condition I
despaired any success with my Alms-mony, to think of purchasing your person;


No, Sir.


Yes, yes, I see it and can bear it; Yet, in these old Clothes I am a Gentleman
and a Soldier; and though my habit be ill, my heart and my sword are good, and
I think my Reputation, as any Soldier needs; for though I have lost my
Fortune, yet I have preserved mine Honor still


You wrong me, Sir; And when you know my Heart and the thoughts she labors
with, you will confess it


Nay, I have told you I can endure it, if you despise me, so you do not tell me
of it; But what is all this to you, who are fair, young and lovely, and indeed
Mistress of all the Virtues depraved man seeks? Good Heaven! What faults have I
seen Wealth and Beauty hide! Even Princes flatter faces, and wink at the sins
and crimes they commit; and while Riches break the Nets, Beauty numbs the
Fishers hands: Riches weighs down the scale, while Poverty lies open to the Law
and censure, liable to the scorn and punishment; for though all are taught to
know the penalty of the Law, it is the poor man is made the example


What poison is this my Ears suck in? His words shake my Soul. --


How silent the stands and hears his railing? Good Corporal, will you trot and
leave your preaching? Bless us from a Capuchin in buff; have you no text to
take but my Mistress when you are to rail? Good Centry, of old St. Frank's
Order, this is no broken bread, nor sour porridge, this House affords no Love
for Charity; Pray pack, and search the stalls when it is dark, or whistle the
poor Bulker


How now, who gave you this liberty of railing? Get you gone, or lie down
behind you door quickly, or I will kick thy carrion carcass out at window


No, no, let her vent her spleen, for the same question is in your heart too,
only you can be so discreet as to hide it; What would you have? Who are you?
One that scorns to play your parts; and though I dare spend my blood, I scorn
to sell it for so base sallary; No, not to enjoy you, though I avow a Love and
admiration for thee, and would run any hazard to purchase thee; See here the
last sum I can command upon the earth, the last meal I know where to eat now in
my Body, when this money is gone; Yet I am such a servant to Love and Beauty,
this last, last hope, I Will freely give to enjoy thee; here, pray take it, I
conjure you take it. Do not scorn me, fair one, now I have said this; For know,


Why so severe, Sir?


Not that I despise you, but to secure my self; All those flames I feel now are
but so many Lusts, I know them by their sudden bold intrusion; The impatiency
and the sawciness of the flame betrays it, still devouring till it be
devoured; had it been Loves pure dart, I should have pined at your feet in
silence, ere found a daring to tell you so. Lust his bastard-brother, and born
of the same Mother, can brook a denial of that which Love dares not ask, and
only grows angry for a time; But the next kind Girl quenches his flame


After all this severe truth, what are we guilty of that you have not
confessed? What crime stains us that you would not now act? You men are
strangely partial to your selves, you would not despise us else; Is the fault
single in us? If not, why should we lose our Honors in the Act, when you think
it an Honor to be the Actors? Who made the Law against Love? Or where will you
find it obliges women only? If the Law be general, must not the crime be so
too


Yes, in Love; for Love it is equal, but not in you, because you will be paid;
you sell your blood which is your guilt: It Is Mercenarines in you that makes
the sin, Nature else would plead for you too; When I hang out my picture, and
at a rate expose my self to all comers, then I will not wonder if you despise
me


And I could urge, when you will take a House and furnish it, deliver up your
Youth and Liberty a slave to our Sex, and wait like a spider in your web, for
all flies that pass; When Angellica knocks at your door, and leads you to your
bed, I will not wonder if you ask a price before I enjoy you; Nor ought you to
wonder when we desire some satisfaction for the slavery we suffer


I am not here to defend such baseness in men, but to condemn it in women.


You have reason, Sir; and I am pleased to find such Honor in your heart; But
your truths are a knowledge I have learned too late: And to afflict my self
with the consideration of that which cannot be remedied is second folly; Only
(once a whore and ever) is the world adage; yet there may be degrees of ill;
and I am vain enough to believe, though I am not a good woman, I am not an ill
Mistress


Faith it is a very ill woman, (if she be handsome) that will not make a good
whore


Gospetto, I can suffer no longer; stab me, kill me, do, tread upon your Nurse,
wound these Breasts that fed thee; All for a Villain that has railed an hour;
Hell upon him, Beggar; why do you talk to him? Sirrah, you know the price,
either pay or begone,


Here, prithee good fore-woman of the shop serve me, and I Will be gone.


Keep your gilded Royal, and troop, good Rutter; here is no selling by small
ware


Yes, on my conscience, thou have sold many a Marvadies worth of thy commodity
ere now


When you speak of a price, Sir, you know what it is; you have the Bill.


It Is truth, Lady, and I desire no favor; let me see; the month is a thousand
crowns, how much comes that to, for a Pistol; divided by four nights in a week.
I, by four nights in a week. -- Hark you, Grannam; take your chalk and cast it
behind the door; see what it comes to, that I may have my penyworth out of your
Lady, and I Will be gone


I tell thee, scurvey, saucy fellow, we sell not this stuff by the yard; the
whole piece, or nothing, Sirrah; I could beat him, A pox take him, h'as vexed
me into a Fever


That Is hard; must a Customer buy whole ships lading? your Shop, or nothing!
faith, Lady, I can be none of the Merchant, as well as I love you, unless I
could conjure; yet now I think on it I have partners, I Will see if they will
join, we will take off your Commodity amongst us. -- ('It Is a likely Girl, if we
can purchase her we cannot be losers; we will take what we use, and sell the rest
of our ware,) I am thinking, Lady, how to compass this Geer, though I am out of
Cash; will you truck, or venture a courtesy? Death, not a kiss, or so, for a
pattern? By this light, I Will have a mouthful of kisses


If I thought they would please you you; should could I be certain you had a
kindness for me more then as I am mere woman, I would not deny you a kiss


Have I eyes, have I soul, or sense? Death, I bleed yet for your shadow; and
offer you freely my last bit of bread; if after this you doubt, command me
something, and try whether I can love or no; or dare frankly serve what I love


No more, thou art a gallant fellow; put up your money, Sir; for though I wish
thy purse as great as thy heart, and thy credit as good as thy humor, or
nature, yet know I would not sell thee a kindness but for kindness sake; By
this and this I swear.


What will this come to? I was never struck first by a woman before.


Can you forgive a fault, and love for love? can you forget I was to be sold,
and value this gift? can you tell your heart I am yours, and not remember I
might have been any bodies? say, can you do this? have you kindness and good
nature enough left to hide such a stain? if not, yet have so much mercy, at
least, to say so; and though you cannot love, yet prithee flatter me


Nay faith, outdo me with kindness, and hang me; if I be not as well natured
as any woman of you all, the world is cozened; inquire where I have gone; if
my women rail upon me for that fault let the sex frown


Kindness is all I ask, and, for that command me; yet know what I offer thee
has been often sought, often denied, seldom enjoyed; but, By heaven, never
pleased; often a Mistress, but never a Lover till now; if thou be'st kind,
forget and forgive my faults that are past, which are crimes of the Nation, not
mine; sold by a Mother, oppressed with misery when I knew no better then to
obey her; though I confess he that had the flower of my youth laid great
obligations upon us, such as good nature and gratitude will always make me
remember with love and kindness; but 'twas not like the Passion that now
disturbs my breast


If this be real, I am mortal; she weeps, sure my Pistols are not worth this
trick; besides, I offered it with all this stir, I would fain believe her
kindness real; but I have been so often bit with sighing, weeping, flattring
sinners, I have no faith left for the sex; yet my Reason tells me I may venture
here; her house is fair, her clothes good, here is furniture, and there are
jewels, her very Baud a Matron-like woman, gravely clothed, and all of a
piece; sure I may trust her; if the worst come to the worst, it is but a few
Pistols lost; rob me they cannot, and beat me they shall not. Well. it is
resolved, I am a proper fellow, and she loves me. -- Come, no more tears, fair
one; All passion but love is unseasonable, and out of tune now; and since you
are a Lover you shall find I can be grateful, kind and serious too; and when
you are collected, tell you it is not only good nature, but wit in women, thus
to surprise a Lovers heart, and give, though not before it is asked, yet before
he hopes, such a favor; the seasonablenss of a courtesy is the beauty of the
action; and Loves fruits above all expect we should gather them in season, if
they hang long they rot or wither; and if neglected, Loves flowers fade and
fall; what beauty had that Rose yesterday, which to morrow is only fit for the
Still? such, and so seasonable was the bounty of this kindness; our Rose and
fruit has now all the fragrancy and season in it; had I won it at long running,
wooing still, and tasted kisses here and there, what is Angellica now would have
been a dull and common joy; for such tastings dull the edge and deads the
stomach of a Lover, who after such weary steps lies down by his Mistress tired,
or without an appetite


Do not distrust our joys then, nor my love; let me not find that curse to have
my first vows doubted; if they be, here will fall in showers all those tears
others have wept to me; all their treasured waters at once I Will pour out at thy
feet; oh! that such a stream could make me as pure a Virgin as I am now a
perfect Lover; then I would beg to be thy wife; but that must not be; for love
bids me not ask that which honor forbids thee to grant; yet you may be my
friend


No more, the gods are merciful; and sins of youth and nature, such as ours,
have their friends amongst them; come, dry those eyes whose fire those tears
cannot quench; and though their beams cannot stab through those waters, yet
they bruise a Lovers heart; and though Love ha^ a Balsam for every wound, yet
nothing heals love so kindly as love again; his wounds then leave no scars nor
feel no pain; it is scarce a sin what they can do who love and are beloved again


Let Us retire, and not only learn but practice this new Doctrine, whose Rules
are easy, and Laws so sweet, 'twill give the blind Lover his eyes, and the Law
his feet, but they will meet


Nay, then a Whores fortune and my curse befall thee; have we spun and stich'd,
dressed and watched for this? is all the honey we sucked from so many flowers
in their youth carried to that hive, for this Droan to waste? What curse made
me consent to her vanity! a thousand Crowns, a fine plot to leave a fame behind
us! what a stink will this story make in Venice? a curse on this Caterpillar;
by that time she has clothed and fed him, we may resolve to go naked our
selves; there is but one remedy left, Best rob her my self, while she has
something to steal; I may keep her when she is old; well, I begin to think this
is no good trade we drive, 'twill thrive neither Whore nor Baud; I have been as
painful in either calling as any she in Venice; my youth had as much beauty and
as powerful friends; and my age as much thrift, Anna Garbota, says one Anna
Spiritata, says another, Anna Bellamana, says a third, Assasina, Echephorbe,
Calladora, these were my names; then Anna who had higher fame! yet see all
these trophies shrunk into one poor Baud and these ruins: who admires but to
moralize upon them? and now to add to the afflictions of my age, in my age this
curse is fallen upon me; 'twould make one swear to be poor and honest to see
such luck as follows me; Love was always fatal to our trade; but I did not fear
this curious mischief, to dote upon a Beggar, a Souldier-beggar, a trade as ill
as our own, as poor too, and as impossible to be made rich; one that thinks it
a dishonor to get or save; we shall never eat again neither, for he will have all
in drink; nay, it is an English Soldier too, and one of the Kings party, three
titles to perpetual poverty; a race of men who have left praying, or hoping for
daily bread; and only rely upon nightly drink


BE he what he will, shall a drunken Tramontaney abuse us in Madrid? Are you a
Spaniard, and suffer this Affront? By Saint Jago I Will strike him in the Church,
but I Will be revenged


It Is the same that saved my Sister, when Pampalona was sacked; The Action was
kind and Gallant; such as ought to plead against any Injury that chance begets;
and indeed 'twas our faults to hide our selves from him


The Devils in 'em, when they get abroad; The Dogs are so muzled and tied up at
home, with Constables, and romwel, they fight for sport abroad


I have seen one of those painted staves disarm a Scarlet Cloak, and command
him into the stocks without resistance; and here they are so sullen they will
not give the wall to Saint Jago, unless he be painted upon it


There is somewhat of the Cock and Mastiff-dog in them all, sullen proud
snarlers, any thing, one another, rather then not be worrying


Methinks that race of Cavaliers should be extinct or quiet at least; they have
been killed or banished, sunk, hanged and starved this thirteen years, and yet
they swarm still; I pitied them at first


Pity'em, hang'em, they are as proud of their persecution as the Jews; and brag
as vainly of their wants as a Castillian would of his blood; no servants, no
money, no clothes, no meat, and always afoot, neither daunts nor dejects them;
they beg as confidently their surly way, and they think as meritoriously as
Capuchins; By this light, I believe 'twill be an order in time, they are
admitted into the Mendicants already; and those that loved the man least called
their great Charles both Saint and Martyr, and the Rogues hope yet to make a
black-red-day for him in their Calendar; their Princes too look as high, and
charge as far still upon one lean Mare, as if they had a hundred led-horse
behind them; and their Duke too fights now in France and Flanders as his
Brother did in Scotland; at the old Rupert rate, ten to one still; And by this
hand they look so above the rest of men, for all their calamities, that when
they past last through Flanders no man durst be heard to pity them, for fear
some one of his dull honest ones should mistake that pity and strike him


I, but that humour's changed now, France has so cut their Combs; the Louvre
and the Pale-royal have been sad enchanted Castles to them, they have kept a
Lazarello's Court there; darkness, loanness, and the nest of poverty; but two
loaves a day, and without fish, to work the Miracle; yet the Gallery was a
Christian Coney-warren filled with Cavaliers of all Trades; and unless they fed
upon their children, it is not visible what they eat


They are now removed to the Palace Royal, where they eat so seldom, and dung
so small, you may as soon step in a Custard as a T -- in the Court; they that
do S -- save it for their own Pig; there is not a blade of Grass left in the
Garden, nor a drop of Oil in the Madona's Lamp; sacrilege and their Sallads
make it burn dim, they are happy that swim, they dive in the pond and steal the
Fish. The younger stomachs browse upon the Cops as high as they can reach, they
have starved the poor Antelope in eating up his Commons; their Grandees only
dine, and that but when fortune smiles: the Grasshoppers are grown Pismires now,
and are abroad as early as the day, and industrious as the Ant, for food.
Brown-bread and old Adams's Ale is current now; yet if little Eve walk in the
Garden, the lean starved Rogues neigh after her as if they were in Paradise;
there is their Resident too, his Arms are up still; but it is long since he had
the Supporters; it is thought he eat the Unicorn last Passover, his Butcher and
he are still in process for the horn; the Lyon's lean too, but he will never be
tame; you may see the Royal Beast still in the Fair; and I have heard an Irish
Capuchin swear (for he is a blade too, though in a gray scabbard) that if the
Cavaliers could be brought to pray as well as fast, he believed the King would
yet have more Saints in his Army then St. Ignatius has Lamps burn dim


There Is a Roundhead in Town, a pleasant fellow, I heard him describe their
Court the other day: the Rogue makes good sport with it; if a man had ill
nature enough to laugh; Carlo heard him too


Yes, he swears the Waiters act Tantalus better then Ovid described him; for
there are those that follow the Cup and Plate, still, constant, lean and loyal,
that have the smoke of the Office though the roast be run away, such as have
privilege still to see, and only to see, what others eat


Condemned twice a day to suffer an apparition of meat; it is sad always to see
and never to eat, food in vision only; nothing to dinner; and sup all night in
a dream, will make your Cavalier but a lean wight


A Court with three Chapels, all Head, and no Bowels, neither Cellar nor
Kitchen but what the Cobbler or a Tailor stitch in


Yet the soul feeds high, spiritual food abounds still; he says; not a meal of
prayers less then in the old Kings days


Besides their Princes breakfast and collation made in private devotion;
admirable souls-food for all the faithful that will come; Pistle and Gospel
with Common Prayer by the Tune; but for belly-timber, not one crum


By this character, if poverty or virtue can plead, sure the English Court will
find a reward; it is great loyalty can make all fast, some pray; and though few
have linen, all wear gray; sure they walk at least in the narrow way


Why, the very stables have their vigils too, they say, and the poor Jades keep
them without Oats or Hay; and let the Master of the horse take care what
Grooms he trusts to keep them; for if they dye within the verge, he swears, By
this light, they will eat 'em


Yet their Footmen swarm still; how came they to stay?


For want of strength to run away; and, for the Queens side, there is neither
fornication left nor pride; nothing but Madam Bluto remains of all the Kitchen,
none above stairs but Suzan, Civil, and her Capuchin


Hot-spur's grown old too, his Gout requires ease; and from head Ostler of the
Court is become Chamberlain with staff and keys


Yes, for the young Prince is from the Indies come; and though his brave
Seahorse foundered in his journey home, yet the poor Jades are now become his
cares; he is no more Admiral, but Palatine Polyxander, great Master of the Mares


Then the young Neptune will to Sea no more.


It Is thought so, for the neglected Trident sticks in the Dunghill, at the
Stable door


By this light, it is Pity such parts, and such a Spirit should be buried there;
who, when he was in Action, bred both fear and wonder; His Enemies call him
still the Devil, and Robin a Cumber


Sir, he that struck me is now above in the Synniora's house; and Anna tells
me, he begs and Rails, but has not a Royal of Plate to bless himself


Lets stay, and see him speak, when he comes out.


And give him a Royal apiece in alms, and laugh at him, 'twill be some Revenge.


You mistake the man, he has a mind above those little things; but I can sting
him; here Carlo, fetch me a Thousand Crowns, you know where to find it; with
that we will destroy his hopes; and to see us possess her, and himself shut out,
will vex him worse then Blows


THey are gone, and there is some mischief in their design I see by their
whispering


I saw one of the Bravoes return from her house, and spoke with him in the Red,
I am confident they know he is within; and who knows but they are gone to
surprise him by some back way


It Is a willful Folly, to throw himself upon dangers needlessly, only for
humor; He knows I have business too, a design of mine own, that waits me. --
I Will knock


See who knocks.


What would you have?


Prithee tell Don Thomaso it is late, and we stay for him.


Would you had him out at Window, so we were rid of him; A curse on the Door
where he enters in, for Anna


And how? come be Ingenuous now; does fortune smile? shall we break her
Windows, or Sacrifice in her Temple


Do you not see it here; Is it possible, such joys as mine can be hid? Does not
the little god appear upon my Brow to distinguish me from the Common Crow'd of
Lovers; No Cupids hovering in the Air, kissing their hands, nor scraping their
short Legs; Formantias bona Mane, something to drink for the service they have
done me? We Will call him no more the blind Deity; Do you see that Eye that
peeps there? Death, it is his Quiver, Hall; And has more Darts then his old one
in it, but they are all to friend. Prithee tell me, where had thou the Sack we
drank at Dinner; The Eloquent, Bold, Fortunate Sack we drank to day? say, that
I may go kiss the spiggot, and kneel to the Butt; It Is Sacred Liquor, I Will dip
my Beads in it, and then touch all things that I would have kind or happy with
them


The wine was good, and there is more of it; If you will walk we will take a
Bottle, and hear the Story at leisure you so labor with; There is good French
wine too, to whet your Stomach with


French Wine? not I, it is the Omen of some ill luck when I drink it; French
wine? when would that Corrasive had such success? No, I abjure it; Satyrs, and
ill Nature, Costiveness, and narrow soul, shrunk heartedness, and ill luck
followed me as long as I conversed with that hungry juice; Cheerful Oily Sack,
you see, has in an hour of happy Minutes crowned all my wishes; I have not one
desire left; Prithee let us be all wanton, and think upon something to want,
Hark? Here Is those Friends will remove all difficulties -- Hark, how they
dance out of tune for Joy to be fallen into my hands; That while we have the
pleasure of spending, these little Rogues may have the Gusto to be spent? it is
He and She Gold while it is here, and begets young pleasures; The fruit shows
their beauty, while the covetous savor, with severe Eyes, keeps them Imprisoned
in their Chests; they have no opportunity to meet, but lie barren; The
separated Sexes for want of use wither, without putting forth either Leaf or
Fruit; Or will you Collation, or Sup with me at our house? I am serious, all is
mine own, and you shall be well-come


What the two Sisters are forgot, I see. The young Lady too, and the plot upon
the hundred thousand Crowns, and all drowned in this joy, wife and all


But thou art not married, I hope, for all thy fooling.


All the honey of Marriage, but none of the sting, Ned; I have a Woman without
that boundless Folly, of better or worse; there is a kind of Nonsense in that
Vow Fools only swallow; I can now bid my Friends well-come without Jealousy;
Our vows are built upon kindness only, they stand and fall together; We neither
load, nor enslave the mind with Matrimony; No laws, nor ties, but what good
Nature makes, binds us; we are sure to meet without false well-comes, or
dissembling smiles, to hide the Sallary of a sin, or blind the Fornication of
a Platonique Friendship; Our knots hold no longer then we love; No sooner wish
a liberty but we take it


I wish you Joy, Sir.


And I have it, Ferd. full joy; hark, how the Chorus sounds; poverty has a
slavery tied to it; It makes Wit and Honor sneak; My soul grew lean and rusty
for want of Credit; It withered the Root of Man in me; But this kind seasonable
Shower sends out Buds again; Thou shall see mirth renew in me; look here, Ned,
your Saint, has she such a Shrine as that Pallas? Does she give such Oracles as
these? hark, how sweet they sound, and in a Language all Nations understand;
there is no Riddles in ready Money


I Will tell you to morrow; This night I am to try how fortunes wheel will rise
upon my Anchor; if I be lucky I envy not any he in Madrid; though it is granted,
The Angellica cannot be excelled in Garb or Beauty


You must consider he is but a young Wencher, but new come to Loves feasts,
he is at's first Course still


And a hungry Lover too, such as never tasted any thing but Loves porridge, and
his Barley pudding in Wedlocks Ordinary; But when we have surfeited of Spanish,
French and Italian beauties as often as you have done, We shall search out such
plumbs as the Angellica; and our nice stomachs will require such curious plates
and sauce to tempt it as those that love us will prepare; yet what we Love will
serve turn


You name Foreign Beauty, as if England had none could please you; Show me
where Cupid has such a Shambles, or such a Market as London affords


I, but you know the proverb, Hall; For flesh and blood; but the Devil sends
Cooks


Gentlemen, your mirth would be more seasonable, when you have thought upon
your safeties, which, I am confident, is not here


Our safety? What danger is there, in Nature, for men to apprehend in our
Condition? Let Us mock and despise all danger, now we have conquered those of
Love and Want; By this light, Famine grew formidable; The lean Rogue was seen
to enter within our Court; and though he skulks in private now, It Is feared he
will grow bold and walk abroad


Since you went up, They passed again; and now I am certain Don Pedro is one of
them; And your acquaintance with his Nature must tell you, He will not brook an
Injury; Which you have repeated to the quick; His sword and his Mistress he has
lost; and how do you believe a Don will brook two such losses


Don Pedro, The Serulina's brother! a mischief pursue him, (for putting her
into my thoughts) are you sure 'twas he? By this light, he is too blame; Not I,
his disguise has injured me


I Am of opinion, 'twill be fit for you to give him a visit; we will go with
you; The truth of this Accident is enough to excuse us, and satisfy him; A
word in season will overcome him more then blows hereafter: besides, As full of
joy as you appear to be with this new fortune; I know you cannot be so little a
Friend to your self, to slight and neglect such a Fortune, and such a
friendship, as the fair Serulina brings


Prithee, dear Harry, let us not be wise yet; this is for serious hours, and
grave thoughts, and but puts water in our Wine to day; yet I Am of your opinion
to find Don Pedro; for he is a person for whom I always had a value and
kindness


Well, Sir, take your own way; As if you could visit him and his Sister not
know you are arrived; which news I Will venture to give her, and find some way to
serve you with her without your Commission; I know the Rogue is so proud that
though he loves nothing else but her; yet he would starve e're he would say so,
for fear she should refuse him


What Is that?


A Feather, the Bird has many.


It Is a Diamon'd, and a good Water; Is there no ready money too?


Fie! Money? I carried it with such State, he believes has got the Indies; I
began, and gave first my Copper gilt Bracelet; had you seen how carelessly I
parted with it, and how unwillingly I received this Diamond, till forced upon
me


Go on, Excellently good; Do you think, he would give me any thing if I should
pretend to love him? I Would so fit him with a speech, if I thought he would


Your part must be beaten out of him, Sanco; if he will not stand till we pick
his Pockets


No, hang them, they are Oaken Rogues, your English; knotty, sullen, crabbed,
wooden Fellows, and will fight upon as little reason as they love; you must
either flatter them, or Cozen them out of what you get, else their dry udders
will give no milk


Of this some other time; and, dear Sanco, haste, and call my Philippo, to whom
thou know my heart is all in serious, what I would seem here; and I were
happy, if my truth with Philippo found but such success as this Fiction;
Prithee tell him, there is a Supper and a Ring attends him, and a better
Fortune, if he can sail the streights, and find it; The Mine in his Pocket is
then our own; Dear Sanco, be still kind, and use thy Art to bring him


Be you ready to receive the stranger, and let me alone to persuade him; This
place of mine has good Fees belonging to it; Else 'twere not to be endured,
it is so pointed at, and this is one of them -- There must be some Allougho had
too, for I shall be dry


When I consider the base means we submit to ere we can gain our Ends, The
sordid ways, besides the sin and shame we pass, to arrive at fortune, It makes
me wonder how any woman can abandon her self so as to play our parts; A Common
whore, How I tremble at it? One that must yield to all Embraces, submit to all
that Lust can invent, nay farther, not only obey their base desires, but blow
the fire too, and tempt, as well as suffer; Bowing before all Deformities, and
all diseases, not daring to refuse either number, time, or place, when their
lust Commands, and all for base Sallary; though we see Our selves despised,
sometime before enjoyed, but always after; No one setting a price or value upon
that youth and beauty we expose; But because it is common, therefore cheap in
their Eyes; Thus when I look back upon the Paths I have trod, I could curse my
Fortune, That, in my Autumn has given me a slave to Philippo


DId you see my brother since!


Yes, Madam; Carlo and he were talking; he inquired for Don Alphonso; they have
some Quarrel; Both are hurt, though slightly; I left your Brother at the Door


Don Alphonso? he is upon his old design, I see; which I shall easily satisfy,
if his inquiry reach to me


I was inquiring for Don Alphonso; I wonder I saw him not since I arrived; when
was he here last


I know not, Sir. Calis, when was he here? I considered it so little my self, I
have forgot when 'twas


And why do you hold so slight an Esteem of him whom your Friends value? a
Person that, besides his Quality and Fortune, has a passion for you


So I have heard you say; but it is more then ever he told me, or had a desire
should be known, as near as I could guess


I am apt rather to believe his visits had more of Love, then your Modesty
would see then, or confess now


If he had a passion, as my Brother believes, yet I am certain, 'twas but a
Passenger in his heart, no Native, nor Dweller there, some sudden kindness to
himself, some complacency and Inclination Incognita, that never appeared, still
without the Garb of a gallant Love, such as is fit for a Maid to take notice
of; else I should have seen it, he still appeared to me of a Nature so
Indifferent as if he cared not to Conquer, which made me always think him not
worth the being overcome; and so I lost him e're I found him and if some one,
more concerned then either of us, had not missed him before me, he had vanished
like his Shadow; This, Sir, is all the Account I can give you of one who was
never thought of when he was present


Men of his Birth and Quality, when they find themselves slelghted, you must
not wonder if they seek a revenge; and though your Sex be exempled from his
anger, yet your friends, that introduced them, may be Subject to it


I do not at all apprehend it, not that I want Care, or kindness for my
Brother; But because I know Don Alphonso has neither sense nor good Nature in
him, to let his Love afflict him; his addresses may make some Women angry; but
his Anger will never be fit for any thing but your Pity


I believe there is some other cause makes him thus displeasing to you, which
time may discover; and then I shall be better able to judge of this Character


Sir, I am your Sister, and one that has as much value and kindness for you as
any Brother can pretend to; and it is grounded upon so much reason, that were
you not my Brother I should still Honor you; For I believe Don Pedro's humor
and nature's such, as may justly pretend to an esteem from any virtuous woman:
But I would not see you presume upon the ill customs of our Country so far as
to make a slave of your Sister, who, if you will be just to her, will give you
greater power then you can ask without blushing


Encouraged by your kindness I shall try my Interest in a small request; I ask
not to be preferred before the world; I only beg to be ranked in your esteem
with Don Thomaso; Why do you frown and blush? Is there any guilt belongs to the
Name of that Wanderer


You are my Brother, Sir, that ask this question; But 'twould have been
altogether as noble in you, not to have given Faith to those whispers that made
you thus curious


His private return to this Town will authorize my fears; and my cares and love
of you will exact this question from you, when you shall know I met him to day
in Town. Why this confusion


You mistake me, Sir; I am not at all confounded with the News, nor ashamed of
any esteem I have for him; My value sprung at first from that praise your self
and my Father gave him. Then Honor, Justice, and Gratitude, made me his
Debtor, being forgot and abandoned by all, and exposed to such dangers as the
licensed Lust of common Soldiers threaten; When Rage and Conquest flew through
the City, ruining all that was virtuous, Then Thomaso, this Wanderer, came and
saved me; for which action my Soul has a high value for him; Nor will I blush
to say it to you, though I never said so much to him, who has ever paid me an
humble and a civil respect since that action, which no time nor absence shall
deface: 'Twas gallant to all men, and particular to me, who, when a Father and
a Brother could forget me, left a prey to the first comer voluntarily, and for
my sake threw himself into all dangers to redeem me; That Wanderer did this,
that Wanderer that saved my Life and Honor; and Serulina has so much virtue as
to prefer him and his Friendship before any frowns or Fortune whatsoever


This is high, and enough to satisfy my question. -- Johanne, a word.


Sir, you are too sudden and serious, and your question heats her.


Madam, Madam. -- She is full of thoughts, but I must awake her; Madam.


Hah!


Do you hear the News? Don Thomaso is for certain in the Town; your Brother and
he fought this morning for the P^duana's picture; they say, he is in Love with
her


It may be so, but till I hear him say it I Will not believe it, nor then neither;
for it is the last thing I would believe of a Lover to say he Loves; few ever
did it well that said it


That Is but one part of the story; Diego says they are resolved to be revenged
upon him, and that they have hired Bravoes to watch him this night; 'twill be
worth your thoughts to prevent the danger, if your Mind be not changed; I am so
much his Servant as to offer my self in any danger, in memory of those services
that are passed


Calis was ever faithful, and shall allways find me kind; and if I live she
shall not say I am ungrateful; It Is now St. Cecilia's Eve, his own Feast, get
our veils, and let us go in disguise to the Caletravo's; There Is the great
Music to morrow, and we shall certainly meet him at the Vespers; He was
always a devote to the fair Cecilia, and Dona Francisca; Music was ever his
delight, but their voices especially; If I meet him there I shall tell him of
his danger; and if he be false, of some which do not threaten yet; But till I
am certain he is false, it shall not lie in the power of Malice to blast his
hopes; I know his humor is wild; and for his Love of Women, it is upon his own
score; he that can be kind and constant to his women so against the hair, as he
is, in spite of Law, conscience, or his own profit, buying at all rates their
kindness, when he does not so much as hope they should really love him; What a
friend would this man be, when all these, and Love to boot, shall seek him, and
if found oblige him? He must either change his Nature, or Love me too; Come,
Calis, I am resolved in two lines to write him what we hear, and something of
what they would have me fear, which I cannot do; For he that had virtue enough
to prefer her before Fortune, quitting his Country for his Honor, shall never
want my Fortune nor my Friendship, when it can serve such a Virtue


I See them, they are fat, fresh, and young, as well foul as fish in season;
All excellent in their kind; and since my Philippo will be at the eating, most
welcome; But how shall we do to be rid of him in time? Dear Sanco, be ingenuous


He^rk, I hear Philippo's whistle, within we'll resolve.


Now, the News; what sudden storm is this that blows so kindly? The business,
for I am in haste


See here one good part of the business, good meat, and better wine; Smell,
pure fragrant Eskeyvous, St. Martin, and old Catholic Sack, with Pane Benit
too; when we consider, (why that scurvy look, Sir,) I speak sense when I said
Pane Benit, and such as I believe you have scarce blessed your belly with these
ten days: Good scurvy Don, be not so starched and hard to please? By St. Iago,
I shall lose all respect for you if you despise my Patrona


No more, Dear Sanco.


No more; By this day you spoil him with cockring of him, and I Will not suffer't
a day longer; Never smell, Sir Botho, I shall grow extravagant, I shall, and
drink this Wine, (do you hear?) and make you eat the Boracho; you will find the
pitch and hair as hard of digestion, and lie upon your stomach as long as the
Jest; you will, Don. Let me alone, a Rascal that has but


Sirrah, Baud, lousie Baud, scurvy louse, bite me once again and I Will crack
thee.


Rogue, let me flea him, and show you when his velvet case is off a
breast plate only of lining; and under those Cordovant boots bare legs;
Slave, do not I know thy shoulders are laced with Galley-lashes, and that thou
bear the mark of the flock on thy back, two F's. Swear to come thrice a week
without sending for, or, by St. Iago, I Will cut thy throat


Why Sanco? As you love me, let him rise; you know the passion I have for him;
and if you hurt him, you wound me; A Curse take me if I Revenge not all
injuries you do him at the rate of Life and Fortune


Death, let him be kind to you, and I Will be as much his slave as ever; else, by
this steel, he shall only have time to confess before I absolve him with one
stab


What shall I do to assure her or you I love more, then to obey your call; or,
when my affairs permit me, come unsent for


Your affairs? what are they? stealing Garlic and herbs at night; The
committing Sacrilege on the lamps for oil for a sallad? And choose this rather
then eat a supper for a Prince with us, unless you have money too: You must be
purchased, with a pox, with our money, earned through a thousand difficulties
to give your Tarantula a dirty cold whore in a cellar; our Dogs lie better;
whose starved poverty, and raw stomach, boyles out in a salt itch; It Is two
peoples work to claw her, you are fain to scratch a spell too, till the
hangman take the office out of both your hands; and this is the Jewel for whom
you must despise my Patrona: This you know too, and yet you dote upon him; my
life upon it, he has given her some charm, some philter; which either confess,
or by this hilt thou dy'st without mercy; do not build upon her foolish pity,
let me alone, speak or I strike


Hold, Sanco; hold and I Will confess.


Be quick, I say. -- Stand off, by this day you will anger me else.


What, will he confess?


Something of which I have been long jealous; and you should have known my
doubts before, but that there was no trusting your fond humor with a secret;
Come, be speedy


Having heard much of a Mountebanks powder when I was in Naples, I purchased
some; it is the same which is now sold in the Piazza, and by the same man; I had
no faith at first, but gave it you upon adventure; but finding the effect,
monthly renewed the dose as the paper prescribes; And had married you, but for
a crafty whore, who jealous that my success with you grew from some such cause,
called to mind that I had formerly mentioned such a powder; she found the box,
and gave it unto me unknown; by whose force I am become a slave to that wretch,
as you are subject to me


O Rogue, Dog! shall I not cut thy throat now?


Not for the world; it is enough I have hopes of my recovery, and the certain
pleasure of his kindness while the frenzy lasts


Have you any of this powder left, Sir?


Yes, three or four doses in a box tied to my beads; you


So, now will I give the Coundess she Bear a dose in the name of Philippo, and
the Rogue another n the name of the Bear; and when it works, give him
opportunity to ravish Calipsa: Then accuse him to the Inquisition, and have him
burnt for Sodomy


Hold; Madam, have you no pity upon me?


Fear not, he shall not hurt you if I have power; I love him yet, and it
grieves my Soul to think that I shall hate him, which is the last effect of
this powder. Rise pray, and let your kindness make amends for the injuries you
have done me


A pox of all ill luck; have I been a Bawd these 20 years, and might, for ought
I know, have been Amoroso to the Infanta, and Heir to 16 Kingdoms? I have the
dose now, and if I can get an opportunity, she is mine; Then do I come forth
King Sanco, there is no Heirs Males to pretend but the Comediantes; Nor is it
the first Prince Spain has seen of the Sanco's; why should I dispute? if
detected, have not I the loving Infanta still to plead? Or, if the worst Sanco?
It Is decreed, King Sanco if I prevail, or a gallant Villain if I fail. --
Come, Don Philippo, I am friends with you as I am Sanco


You are, Sir; it is well you can be friends considering --


Why, there is the difference betwixt an injury done by a Prince, and a subject;
Princes when they do an injury they never forgive him it is done to, but hate
the man, because they believe he but dissembles, and has not forgot the injury;
now I that am your vassal freely forgive you all the displeasures I have done
you; come, kiss my Patrona, and smile out this Moon, and let us follow our
design; -- Which, I hope, will put me in equipage for my great work,


Come, no more tears; I am satisfied, still in doubt! these deeds of Love are
never well sealed; come, print that kiss again, and then let me know what the
design was I was sent for; for I believe neither of, you know what is happened
since


It Is truth, though my fears have long doubt'd what is discovered; yet I had no
thoughts of inquiring that secret now; but it is past, and you shall know our
design; see who knocks


It Is Don Mattheo's man with his Basket; I forgot 'twas his day; prithee,
Sanco, tell him I am sick, or abroad, or busy, or any thing to be rid of him,
or desire him to dine with me to morrow


Look out, and then you will be kind to the Cesto, what ere you are to the man.


The Capons and Veale look well, and shall be welcome; and how bright that
Bacon shines, larded with lean


Such Bacon is a beautiful savory sight in a Kitchen; and those Pigeons have
Olive-branches in their mouths; they look as if they had flown out of his
Holiness Arms to come to you Pamphilians; and will you refuse to receive them
with peace


By no means, Lady; those Annemellys too win my soul; I am resolved to let in
his Supper, it is belly-timber, Child; consider that, able to build two good
meals of when we will; I love a Larder when it is full of such good company; a
clean washed Kitchen it is as ill as a dry Cellar; then there is Dona Borachia
and her handmaids, their pregnant wombs swell like the Grapes that filled 'em;
and can you be so cruel to refuse their great bellies to lie in the Cellar,
take heed of being inhospitable to Bacchus. Don Philippo and I will refer our
selves to one of them, that our quarrel may be perfectly reconciled


See Matheo's be not troublesome, I Will yield to all the rest.


Let me alone to manage this affair, while you inform Philippo of our design.


LEt me go; had I thought Don Harrigo had more kindness for me, then to hear an
insolent fellow despise one that has ever had an esteem for him


You complain, who are indeed too blame; do you believe men will spend their
money in these houses, and not have the freedom of their humor


Let him be as free and wanton as he pleases, so he keep it to himself; why
should his mirth choose us to despise? bragging, here the beauties and favors
of other women; we know you came all now from the Angellica's; is this
friendship? to make us the subject of your scorn and mirth, as if we could not
deserve or distinguish a civility; if Don Harrigo had any esteem for us, he
would not have exposed this place to his insolent rallery; sure you have not
observed, Sir, any such obsceneness find encouragement or liberty here


It Is true, we are merry; but since it dislikes you we will be gone; I never knew
you expected Homilies, moral Philosophy, or Lectures in Divinity to be read
hear; you should set up a cross and a pot of holy water at your door; it is the
first Bush or Baudyhouse I ere saw exacted more then the reckoning


I thought Don Harrigo had come upon another acount; I took him for a Lover,
but I am deceived


Not a whit; a Lover and a perfect Lover, one that loves but one, and that is my
self


Then it is not possible to oblige you!


Nothing easier.


How comes it then you are thus free, after all your professions, and my
civility


Because I have wisely resolved against the slavery which I see all you women
condemn your Lovers to; when I have a nature can lick my self whole, sigh and
blow out a passion, or weep to quench the flame, be sullen and kick till I have
thrown a Mistress as other Quacking Lovers can; when I have their oils to cure
the burn, then I Will venture to play with his flame


But, for old acquaintance sake, you may teach a friend how to know these
Emp'rick Lovers that have such remedies against a Mistress; prithee, tell her
their marks, that she may shut her door against them


They are easily known by Don Harrigo's company.


And better by the Saretta's folly, who puts out her Birds eyes; not contented
they should be her prisoners, but they must be blind too; which cruel curiosity
I shall not approve, though the Bird sings better; sure you women have great
imperfections, which you are afraid a Lover with his Reason might perceive;
therefore upon the first springing of an inclination it is your business to
depose that


Pray, tell me how to know him; is there a new mark besides sanguine, fat and
merry? will they be so cured, as to leave no scars behind them, not a
twittering


Scars! yes, and visible ones, which they are proud of too; those that are best
healed, either by scorn or counsel, choice of wine, or change of women (as fair
and kind as they) yet the Cicatrice will stay


But does Love leave scars, say you? -- Nay, you shall stay and hear Doctor
Harrigo read upon Love; who knows but you may profit in your own cure, of a
slight wound you say he has given you? the scars, good Don Harrigo, the scars


Alas, Sir; they are as many and as different as the wounds the Boy gives,
besides his Mothers; but hers are visible, the young man's are more innocent;
see here, Knots of old Ribband, Braids of Hair, Rings with Poesies, Seals and
broken Gold


What, you are sad; did you think to find men constant?


Not sad, nor much pleased; yet I am glad to find Don Harrigo is so near his
cure as to know his disease; I see he will try to cure fire with fire, the remedy
has been often proved; Angellica must now be applied to his breast to take out
the sire Saretta's eyes kindled; yet I doubt not but we shall have the pastime,
to divert our selves with him in his days of repentance; when he has given his
thousand Crowns, 'twill make us all merry; poor Montebank! she asks a thousand
Crowns, and descends to a Ryal; and yet no Chapmen; at last she gave her ware
to the standers by, which Thomaso took for love; and she will want none at this
rate; Don Harrigo will be one too


And that is all your sexes pride, every one would be Cupids shepherdess, and
govern the whole Flock of Lovers; I have seen some have a handsome troop, and
the poor beasts knew not which was best used; all bleat and run when she calls;
this has the Bell and Garland to day, that the Ribband and Bough to morrow;
they will sing and pipe before their Flock, when each one sighs, and thinks she
sings to him, when she but keeps them together; and if she fold them in her
arms by turns, it is for the Lamb, and the Fleece; Saretta knows the commodity
of a Flock of Lovers is etter then the pleasure of a tame Ram


Being of this humor, and this opinion of women, I wonder you will spend so much
of your time amongst them; but fly, and avoid the danger and save your fleece
and flesh


See who comes here to break off your discourse; come, pray no frowning, you
know his humor; and say what he will now, I heard him speak kindly of you this
morning, and prefer your beauty before your Sister Paulina's; what? I see Don
Thomaso can be reconciled to a lean woman, though he admires the fat


I love what loves me, which supplies beauty; it is for young men, Cornelio, to
flatter and pay


It Is the way never to come late to Loves Feast; if any dish be standing you
can make a meal upon it; necessity and kindness will furnish all that beauty
wants


I never saw any man yet cut my piece; some are for secret, others charity, a
third for conversation, and cares neither then for face nor fortune; a rusty,
moldy Maid, filled with Platonique sentences, is the same things to him a
Girl of fifteen is to us; he despises the body, yet I love to see that Prince
in good clothes when the soul inhabits a Palace built in perfect Symetry; I
know no jest, no eloquence, nor Apothegms, have more savor or pleasure then a
voice, nor more salt then a kiss from a Girl of fifteen, smooth as Rushes,
white as Lillies, plump as Grapes after showers; give me this, and let your Wit
take his Sybill and her Oracles instead of teeth in her mouth; and while he
spends his days in such Monuments of women, let me clasp this smiling Girl,
whose Ruby folds above her chin, laughs and discovers those pearly flocks
within; and for wit in women, so they say kind things, we know it is no matter
whether they be true or no


Can you be contented with flattery, Sir? sure your heart is easily satisfied;
that is a root from which you can expect no constant friendship


Constant friendship, Child? Marry God forbid such a curse as constancy should
follow me; I Will leave that for your Anchorit-lovers, whom Matrimony has vowed
to some old woman's Cellar of threescore; there the sin of constancy and
rashness of the vow, for better for worse, finds a just judgment in the
conversation of Aches, Palseys and Catarrhs, which Wed-lock and Hymen hangs
upon fools; who would have it thought constancy, to dote on Age and wrinkles,
and pass their ignorance for a virtue; but the Vine and the Sun teach better
things; beauty cannot be divided from variety, no face is too new, or wine too
old, nor a friend too true


Faith, Secrecy is even the Brother of that Folly, a foolish humor that women
have made a virtue, because it is convenient sometimes


Secrecy a virtue; a damned ungrateful vice, only known where small beer is
current, despised where Apollo or the Vine bless the Country; and though Joves
Wife was a shrew, yet we find none of his Mistresses hid in Roots or Plants,
but fixed stars in heaven, for all to gaze and wonder at, though few have wit
to admire, or power to imitate; and though I am not Jove, to place my
Angellica, or my Paulina there; yet my kind heart shall proclaim how fit for
such places such starry beauties are; and when my Brother comes from Salamanca
he shall write our Chronicle


Pray, when will he be here? I have heard much of him, and I long to see him;
is he like you? has he your wild humor


No, he is a serious black fellow, he smells like Serge and old Books; but yet
he loves a Wench too, for curiosity, or so; for he only lies with them for
experiment, to be able to approve or decry the pleasure the more feelingly in a
Satyr. When he comes I Will wait upon him to your froward Sister, because their
humors will agree; for she is for a serious threshing Lover


Come, I say, embrace, or I Will break all correspondence with you; what, fall
out with your Brother


Sister, these frowns must blow over; I will not see them thrown upon my
friends; you know I love him; and if you expect I should converse civilly with
your interest, you must comply with mine


I have no mortal quarrel to your servant; only I would not have him rail upon
me because I have not wit enough to fall in love with him; it is true, his hand
and head are white; but I am past the nursery, no Child to be taken with such
Cream and Custard; yet if you have such kindness fot the Dairy, much good may
it do you; give me my old friend, Don Harrigo; I love this color, sullen Sack;
I love the Kitchen and the Cellar in a man; this is gravey and man's flesh; and
this Oak will have leaves upon his head when your Rose-tree and all is withered


Nay, now I Will kiss you; and if you anger me with this humor toss me in a
Blanket; By this light, I had rather be handsomely abused then dully flattered;
prithee Ferd. call for a bottle and a glass; come, we will have the Song we made
last


Come, every man his Glass.


Women, Women, Wine and Health,
Ye gods, we ask no other wealth;
The rest of Nature and of Art,
For this kiss I Will quit my part.

These blessings, though they flow on earth,
Jove enjoys not but by stealth.

Why else, my Girl, did Juno frown?
And poor Simele to ashes burn!
The god turned Bull, and Maid a Cow!
So we know why, no matter how.

See, my Love that flaming star,
'Twas once Ariadnes Aubourn Hair,
Which her god in Bracelets wore,
Not less esteemed cause Theseus whore.

Then in her god, to her god let us drink,
Of the Vine, in the Vine let us think;
And sacrifice this glass of Sack
To those sparkling gray eyes, and the flaming black.

Who Is there?


It Is I, prithee open the door; is your Mistress at home?


Yes, Sir; but she is busy, a man of quality sups with her; Sanco was to find
you, to desire you would come to morrow; your basket and your bottles are safe


Prithee, Kecka, come to the back door that I may speak with thee.


Walk off a little till they are quiet; as soon as I can come without being
missed I Will wait upon you


False Devil, how durst she do this? and that dull stranger too enter without
my leave


Alas, Sir; it is their trade; Boat-mans-luck, you know, pass as his fraught
comes; this is some job of work she has gotten by chance; and you that are her
friend must not be against the good of the house


I shall know all when her Maid comes; the Queen dotes, that makes me steal a
bit now and then from her Mistress to give her


WEll, and how think you? was this a purchase to be Lost for a little Coyness?
where shall we make a voyage, if we refuse to touch at these fortunate Isles,
because they are strangers


No, I Am of your side now; But when you love for shadows, and dote upon gay
Clothes, some young thing for dressing himself; when a Feather, Gittern, or
Sarabrand, begets Admiration, or when poor Poetry prevails upon your passion,
to give your youth and fortune for a Sonnet, when nothing, but the Dedication
belongs to you, such Fondness makes me rage; I speak without Interest now; For
since you know and have forgiven the fault I made, I shall hereafter faithfully
serve you in memory of past kindness


Except your own; and you know I was never guilty of such a Folly; No other
wound nor scar afflicts my mind; and when once the Moon has prescribed a remedy
for that Poison, I shall quickly recover the old Character, of being insensible
again; what are you thinking on


The party within, his silver, sword, gay Clothes, and Rings, besides that at
his Bandstring, bundles of Seals, Watches, abused Gold, bowed into Bracelets?
All shows the Rogue is at his Ease, a merry soul, and a wanton Fortune I
warrant you; such superfluous Expenses shows he wants no money; His Breeches
too, those shells, I believe, have good Kernels in their pockets


Those toys are such Feathers that grow upon Fools, for wise men to pluck, All
the difficulty I find, is, his being a stranger; and the noise of such an
Action will hinder our Trade with them hereafter


Rather, that will be the security of the business. This is not only a
stranger to us, but to the Country too; This knows nothing, neither your Name,
nor street, so far from knowing your House, that he does not know his own; And
when it is done, do but change your Quarter, and he is at a dead loss for ever;
If not, within ten days he is gone; and I perceive he will be flayed e're he
goes; as good you do it as another; he shall have no harm, a merry Night for
his Money; we will have the profit, and he the Experience of the Jest


He Will kill me when he misses his Clothes and money.


Leave the care of your safety to me; he shall undress himself in my Chamber,
your Toy let and night Gown are laid out already; let Sanco and me alone to
fit him, for a Cook, and a valet de Chamber


Well, I am not of your opinion; yet, so long as you do him no harm, I submit.


I Am resolved to see the depth of this design; If the stranger stays I Will take
my Revenge at Leisure; if he goes, she shall see I am sensible of this Affront,
to admit a Visit upon my day, without my consent! Farewell, Stephano, lets meet
to morrow at the old Rendevouz


Softly, pray, Expect me here; when the strangers gone, I Will call you.


Not a word to her, that I am here, I shall put her to another confession fit
again


Undress you in my Chamber; lest they find the Goose has been here by his
Feathers


Mum wench, make haste, lest the pot boil over before you come; I have no
patience betwixt the sheets


SOftly, I pray, and make no Ceremonies, but follow me, I must carry it my
self; For I dare not trust my Maid with your lying here this night; she is too
kind to him that was sent away


Hang her spy, Turn her to grass; I Will get you a dumb Girl.


Within you will find Sanco ready to serve you.


Make haste my Dear, you know the pain longing Lovers suffer, when their Joys
are drawn within the afflictions of a few Minutes; All steps move slow, time
has lead upon his wings; The youthful Sun runs lazily, and we throw our selves
to meet the Embraces of Friends whom with greedy longing we expected


You speak my pain, whose love and desires still precede your wish; (Though I
blush to say so) and grudges this lost time, though spent in hearing the Music
of thy voice, that tells my heart you love me


This kiss only, and then take thy Flight on Loves wings to return again;
Love, that knows no grief nor pain like those that sigh in vain


It Is foolishly done to abuse him, for he is of a humor one need not pick his
pocket, he will do it himself; it is an ill natured Crime, twice a sin, to rob
such that give so much; The ill natured Devil would have had me done it,
without giving him a Nights lodging for his money


HOw Propa this little Rogue is, in every thing! Night gown, slippers, Cap,
and Toylet? As brave as if she were to marry some Prince to night; sure it is my
wedding Night, at least I Will imagine it so; And that which is the Excellence of
this Blessed Country, A man may every Night have a several Bride, for a Pistol
Jointure; Prithee call the Lady


As Soon as you are in Bed, Sir, I shall.


That fellow too, I took him for a Cavalier at least, and it is a Pimp; He might
be a Justice in our Country, by the garb and gravity I met him in


SEe, here is the Nest, I have taken the old one sitting; you shall have the
watch; the case is Gold, and Cordial. This purse and hundred Pistols, and in
the waste and knees of his Breeches a Magazin of heretical Gold, old Besses
Coin all, our arch Enemy; the act is now justifiable; the Inquisidor might have
done it; he should have lost it at Vittoria; If he complain, I Will make his
Process; and had it not been a hard heart could have let these Birds sing in
another Woman's Cage


But what shall I do in the morning?


Sanco is to wake you in have, and cry your husband's come; you must start out
of the Bed, as if to save your self; then I swagger with my own shadow in the
next room, till Sanco urges the danger to him, how impossible it is to escape
with life, if surpised; that there is no denying or defending the act; for he
had found his Clothes and was now staying for men to destroy him; having thus
frightened him, seduce him, in his drawers, to follow him to some place of
safety; Then convey him out at the Backdoor, and lose him in the street, and
come round to the foregate, where I Will expect him; he being then unarmed and
naked, with darkness and fear about him, his anger will open no doors


This is a most inhumane jest; and I must not consent to such a Barbarity.


Only a Jest, a Summer Jest, I vow; if he be met let him pretend h'as been in
Fresco. Now Sanco, the news.


Why, he is in Bed, and expects you with much impatience. impatience.


Give us the Key of one of your Chests, to lock up these transitory blessings,
and then we will wish you good shipping, and a fair wind, till day break; But
then we shall raise a storm shall wake you; O Sanco, little does he or you
think what price he must pay for this Night; His Breeches have a Mine of Gold
in 'em


My share comes pat for my design, to make me brave in Clothes; Being once in
order to Court I go; all there are fine, but the Infanta will be only mine, or
the powder shall fail his force


THe Stranger is gone, there is some disgust amongst them; For she is gone
fullen to bed; she would not let me light him because I grumbled at her for
disappointing you


But where is Philippo?


He stays; She Is become such a slave to that wretch, that she smiles or frowns
upon us just as he commands her; And I know she has disappointed both the
Stranger and you, only to pursue her extravagant passion with that Beast


Thou art a kind Girl, and I shall not forget it; prithee come quickly back
again


In a minute; but pray be quiet and silent lest she discover us; You must find
the way to my Chamber in the dark; for I dare have no light in it, lest she
should be angry at my siting up; I Will peep, and as soon as Philippo goes to bed
I Will return


Make haste, I Will not to bed till you come.


Her sullenness has gotten me an opportunity; when the Mistress will not, the
Maid is handsome


Now have I a curious Humor to rout the whole Family, disappoint Philippo, and
cozen both the Maid and Mistress; It Is but stealing in the dark to Lucetta's
bed, and surprising her in her froward Humor, where she lies expecting that
crooked Rogue; But then Kecka will be mad, and if she be, there are other days
and nights to cure her; If not, it is but a Chamber-maids


SHe is very long in coming; Some nicity now, some gentileness, to make her
more welcome; Some perfumed smock now, or finer night clothes then ordinary;
These Women are right City Cooks, and stay to garnish the dish while the meat
be cold; I could find in my heart to steal out of the bed and see what she is
doing. Hark, the door opens


If she be awake, I Will tell her boldly who it is; if not, I Will surprise her.


Whist, who is there?


It Is. I.


Come, my Dear.


So kind, she has had some inckling of my designs. -- Where are you?


Here, my Heart. --


You can counterfeit, I see. --


Some trick, I find it; these Whores have laid betwixt them to afront me.


How now, what are you? what would you have?


What would I have? I believe both our businesses here may be guessed without a
witch; But I shall be revenged.


Nay, you stir not, Sir; I can hold a bearded Venus as fast as you; This is
some Theif; what ho, Sanco, bring some lights here


Light Kecka, light Syniora; Thieves, bring lights.


Thief or no Thief, I Will have one bang at him for my kiss.


What noise is that in my Chamber?


'Twas the Strangers voice.


And Mathias, or l'me mistaken.


Dog, Rogue, will thou worry me?


Hah! Traitor; In my Bed take the advantages of a naked man?


It Is their voices, I am undone; That Whore Kecka has let Mathias in, who
finding the Stranger in the Bed, I fear, has murdered him; Run, as you love
our lives save the Stranger, we are all lost else, confiscate to the Law, and
shamed for ever; This is a just curse upon your covetous mischief


That Whore shall dearly pay for it.


Take your Sword and second me, it is no time to waste in talking; If Mathias be
there, you're sure he is not alone; take your sword, that we may be able to
force him to reason; Pray stay you here, that nothing be laid to your charge
whatever happens; lest his Rage having power should act some bestial Revenge
upon you


Leave talking of mischiefs that may be, and hasten to prevent this certain
ruin that threatens us


Be what thou will, I Will make thee repent this visit.


What a Devil art thou that usest me thus? I neither know thee, nor looked for
such a Bedfellow


What am I? A Gentleman and a Stranger that is to be abused, robbed, and jeered;
But if I do not make you repent your share of the Villainy, I am a Dog


Help, Murder, Murder; his fist lights like a hammer on my Face; a black
mischief befall that damned Kecka


Kill that Rascal; Death, are you become Master of this Syniora dispose of her
time and person without your leave? I Will learn you to come when you're sent for


Save your self from him by the back door, and follow me; I Will convey you to a
friends house, and immediately bring your clothes; and as soon as I can inform
my self of this mischief you shall know it; but, by my Iife, it is a mystery yet
to all


I Will not stir a foot: Give me thy sword, I Will warrant I Will defend the House
against them all, till you fetch a sword and second me


No, Sir, I will serve you with it, but not quit mine; where is your own?


Would I had but a knife to cut yonder Rogues throat with.


You know not the Law of this place; we are undone if any such thing should
happen in the house; For the Syniora's sake, Sir, follow me


I will not stir a step till I am revenged on you all.


Retire, however, and preserve your self till you may be revenged; You shall
find both the Syniora and my self will join with you


I Will follow you; but be certain the day shall not surer rise, then I Will find
my Revenge


WHy so; Now you have had your will, and I am destroyed; what mischief made
this encounter


I know not, but I can guess; Where Is Kecka? That Queen has a finger in the
business


Well, what remains to remedy this?


The same remedy will cure it yet, if Sanco observes his first Instructions,
and lose him in the street; the Stranger knows nothing, neither him, nor us,
nor the house


But if he should come to know who we are, what then?


When that accident happens we must think of a remedy for that too; In the mean
time send for Kecka, that we may inform our selves what is past


The news, Sanco; where is the stranger?


Where I left him, at the turning behind the Jesuits; but he is in such a
fury, I Am confident he will hazard a hundred lives rather then sit down with this
affront


'Twas well he got not a sword, you would all have paid for your trick.


And I counsel you to let me carry him his clothes and his money, this morning;
and tell him ingenuously the whole truth; then you may make friends again; for
I know he loves you, there is nothing lost neither by it; for I dare say he
would give all you can steal where he is kindly used


What have thou there?


Mathias his clothes, I found them in Kecka's Chamber, who has confessed all;
you shall have the story within; Mathias and she should have been merry to
night, but with no ill intention truly; but when he heard the stranger was
gone, and you alone (which you told Kecka yourself, and gave cruel Mathias
occasion to be false to love and Kecka from whose bed he stole to surprise you
in yours) there he met his punishment in the martial Maid, who with a Beard and
Buffets quickly laid the Knights lust in the dust; the jest will afford
laughter on all sides, if well carried; Mathias can blame no body but himself,
nor the stranger accuse any thing but change; and if Mathias that was beaten
can forget, sure the other may forgive the beating; if you will be ruled, I Will
heal all to morrow; if not, somewhat worse will follow


Where is that damned Kecka? dear Sanco, as thou love me turn her naked out;
she shall not sleep in this house, false beast


Yes, that she may run and find the stranger, and tell him all that is past;
rather shut her up, and chain her; lest she break loose and discover us before
we reconcile the business


Sanco has Reason; shut her up, and put out the light; lest that discover us in
the street when the rogue makes a noise; come retire, and leave the care of him
to me


No, I am of Sanco's opinion, to send him his clothes and money again, and
invite him and Mathias both to dinner, and make a perfect peace; the jest will
be good too when they shall both see 'twas accident; so we shall avoid both the
scandal of such an action, and the danger of their revenge


I am not of your mind, I apprehend no such danger; if he be angry it will be
forgot ere he can express himself to be understood; if not, I can digest my
part with this Cordial; Nor can I repent an action that carries ready money
with it; and when will his friendship be worth a thousand Ryals of Plate apiece
to each of us? if he frowns, we have as good Arguments against his anger as he
has for it; a sword and an arm; I know no other; yet if you approve it we will out
of Town, for a day or two, and be gone before day to avoid suspicion: you and
Sanco shall walk to the Bridge, and I Will meet you with a Coach; then we may
pretend we were out of Town when this happened; we will take Mathias with us and
stop all mouths; come, pray be ruled; here is six hundred Arguments in Gold of
our side; we will see the Escurial in our walk, and be merry a month upon the
jest; and is not that better then spoil a good business with a little sneaking
repentance


Before that month I hope to see you deposed from that Tyrannick power over my
heart, which makes you command thus absolute; I obey, but if my fears prove
true you will dearly pay for it


I, I; let me suffer, be you ruled; and leave the rest to me.


I am not sorry to hear they have abandoned the thought of restitution; my
share, I Am sure, will be least in the danger, though it be equal in the spoil;
for I can run away and prepare my self for my great design with this ready
money, and the powerful powder: I will enter Sanco, that must go forth a Prince


I May whistle and whistle, but the Dog will not come; it is dark and late, few
people stirring in the street; the villain is gone, and has left and lost me on
purpose; what course to steer I know not, either to find mine own lodging or
theirs; her name too is jumbled out of my head; hell and mischief go with it;
now had I as live go to the Gallows as return home; the rogues will so rejoice
and triumph over me when they hear of this mischief; their jests will sting
worse then a Dog-whip; what a day and a night has this been? twice drunk, twice
cozened, and twice beaten; mischiefs by couples; I shall give a fine account
of my travels; a few of these unnatural days will make the journey seem
tedious; what an ass was I to believe such a woman, so clothed, so nobly
lodged, and richly furnished, could be maintained or had for nothing! Puppey,
blind wilful Puppey; dull, vain Ass, to believe she could fall in love with me
at first sight; no, I am an Ass, it is visible; she read the fool in my face,
the Essex Calf; for what grace indeed, beauty or virtue, can I plead, then this
face which I can suffer because I am acquainted with it; dull Ass, to be
flattered into a mischief when I was sober too! I could pull my self by my long
ears, which, methinks, I see by starlight they are so visible, there is
nothing to redeem such a folly, but a home, full revenge without mercy, upon
the whole nest of them. What lights come there? I must hide my self some where,
else the people in the street will pass their time with me. -- More strokes of
fortune yet! A


See here is some Lover sleeping in Fresco, after his Serranad; what was the
business, Carlo, at Lucetta's, this night


Lucetta, Lucetta, that is the damned name.


Some quarrel amongst her Amoroso's; one leaped the window in his drawers.


That Is some comfort yet; I went out at the Door.


That Philippo will undo her; He is still playing the Bravo amongst her Lovers;
I wonder what she sees In that Beast to love him for


She Is a beast her self, false and proud; Nothing but Pikeroons, and falsehood
amongst them; There Is that Sanco, a Bloody infamous Villain; and while she
admits him, No man of Honor, that loves his Throat, will sleep under her roof


Lucetta, Philippo; Those are they against a world; That Sanco too is the
Squire that lost me. But if my revenge find not him and them too let them
laugh at the dull English man; ha! The light again; I Will step off, e're I am
discovered, and take Sanctuary in some great man's Portico


NOt know him?


No, faith; nor understand him scarce; I Am sure, he is a stranger, one that
supped there


What said Lucetta? was she of the Plot?


No, nor none of them knew of my being in the house; nor was he less amazed
then I; 'twas in the dark; For I went in Knavery, without a light, to surprise
her, who, I thought, had been alone in her bed; We kissed, and hugged each
other, till our Beards discovered; but afterward, you may see by my face how
he set up mine


Where are your Clothes?


I was even glad to leave them behind me, and escape so; He Is naked too. I saw
him stalk before me, like a Ghost in the shade; you must needs have met him


We did so, He was got upon a stall; Do you not remember, I told you there lay
a Lover in Fresco; It Is one of Thomaso's crew upon my life, let us walk; if we
find him, we will laugh him into a Fever


Gentlemen, you may laugh, but believe it, I cannot; would I were in my own
Bed, I would not quit it for any she is in Madrid. Now do I smell a Ballad to
morrow in the Prado, of the two Bearded Lovers, kissing like the Devil and the
Colliar in a Ladies Bed; If I be not revenged I shall pine in my mind


You cannot be revenged on her; it is clear, she is Innocent; indeed Sanco and
Philippo should be well stroak'd with Cudgels; and larded with ponyards, to
refresh the Rogues memories, and teach them their duties toward Gentlemen


The Dog made me leap out at a Window; Else I am confident he had killed me; he
gave me these Three hurts e're I could pass


What a Rogue 'twas to strike a naked man! come let us try if we can find your
Enemy. Give us but the satisfaction of that mirth, and we will all join in your
Revenge


There is time and ways enough for a Revenge, for those Rascals have more
Enemies then thou have friends. The Galleys and the Gallows are their Common
disease, and all unnatural deaths their natural Ends



