The Pilgrim. A TRAGEDY, The Scene MILLAIN.

Written in PARIS, BY THOMAS KILLIGREW. 1651.

DEDICATED TO THE COUNTESS OF CARNARVAN.

LONDON: Printed by J. M. for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the sign of the Blew Anchor, in the lower Walk of the New-Exchange. 1663

WEre I worthy to counsel the Duke, he should know this removing of Generals
breeds ill blood, and disaffects the Soldiers; whose kindness at this time is
of more importance then his security will give faith to


That Cosmo was made General, though it seemed strange at first; yet those that
know Julia's power with the old Duke, he being her Son, wonder not at it. But
how he comes now to be disgraced, and yet she and Martino hold their Interest
in Court, makes me suspect some foul play, some further, designs then their
Craft will let us discover


He has won strangely upon the Soldiers by his Courage and Affability; for
those that are his Enemies will yet allow Prince Cosmo a gallant and stout
Soldier, else he would have found the hatred they bear his Mother would have
clouded all his parts; his first Reception was so cold, we thought he looked
dejected, as if he were ashamed to own his Mother


Prithee talk no more of her; she is an evil the Nation ought to arm against;
The sword (and that speedily bent against her) can only prevent the ruin she
and Martino threaten this State with. Prayers find too slow Remedies for such
mischiefs as their power daily contrives


Heaven had many Crimes to punish in Millain, when she and Martino were sent
our scourges; Her own Subjects despised and scorned her, and deriding her
victory, say, we fought for their diseases only


I wonder how Prince Sforza brooks this Familiarity of hers with Martino; for
it is said, he passionately affects the Princess Fidelia, a Virgin of
unquestioned Virtue, and yet her Daughter


She has indeed an unspotted Fame; and when I consider it, Iam amazed to think
Nature should send such Sovereign Fruit from so poisonous a Root; yet they say
Prince Sforza but ill digested his Fathers Marriage with the Mother, for all
his Passion for the Daughter


Can you blame him? Is it not a hard Condition to find his Enemy and his
Captive become his Mother? Supplanting him in all the power and trust of his
Father? yet his Piety makes him obedient, even to her weakness; and civil, even
to his Fathers faults


O it is a matchless Gallantry inhabits in him; his Princely breast is all
composed of Honor; whether Enemy or Friend, he conquers still; so faithful in
his Promise, mild in Command, and gentle in Dispute, Constant and Resolute in
dangers, never absent to himself, never transported when he overcomes, nor
losing himself in disorder, nor amazed when he is worsted; I have seen him win
and lose a battle, but with that evenness of Soul, as fair Gamesters use to
meet their fortunes with


Yet I heard him say, he thought it had been better for Millain to have lost
the battle, then won Pavia; since his Fathers weakness had so far betrayed
him as to marry Julia


See if we were not fallen into the discourse of her again, that Curse; and our
miseries are so large a Theme we cannot shun it, though we warn each other


To divert you from that discourse, pray let me know your intention; are you
for Millain, with the General, or will you stay here? I mean to wait upon him,
and, by that Title, till I see some worthier then himself receive his Command,
which they will scarce find in Millain


Prithee, Ferdinando, think better of me, then to believe I will serve under
any Man that Clouds Prince Cosmo; let us go find him at his Lodging


He is gone abroad, I saw him and Antonio upon the works; This way we shall
meet them, see where they come. --


They need not be so hasty in repeating their Injuries from Millain; Cosmo has
not so ill a Memory to forget the first, that they need not prompt him with a
second; -- These are to Command you to quit the Army, and to attend us at
Millain, to know our further pleasure. Alphonso the Duke may command, and it is
just that I obey; And it is as great a truth, his Command ought to be just. What
if I will not quit the Army? it is not this paper can force me, Carlo


Force! who dares think they can force hence the Lombard General, or, atleast,
publish that thought? Death! do not go, Sir; say to us, you are wronged, and
you will have justice ere you stir; we will send a Messenger shall make Millain
know she has her power from hence


I thank you for your hearty affection; but I must not let you be faulty to
serve me; my Lord, you may return, and say, I shall obey; My innocence dares go
and meet the author of this injury, and then play Cosmo's part


Sir, I am sorry 'twas my misfortune to bring this unwelcome news; and 'twas
one part of their design that wrought this mischief, to have me employed; that
it might wither my hopes in your Highness favor; but this Letter, Sir, I hope,
will acquit me; it is from your Princely Mother.


Giovanni, that is one of Julia's familiars; would thou or I had the opening of
his heart; what a nest of Villains we should discover


Women's counsels are like their actions; let her practice her patience still;
though she can digest affronts and scorns, they shall find Cosmo will not; I
must be patient and suffer an affront, because Prince Sforza is to succeed in
my Command


So it was reported, Sir; but 'twas the wonder of all, why he of late should so
labor your remove; nor could we learn who were the means he wrought by, till
the Duchess suspecting your Sister Fidelia intercepted some of her Letters, by
which she found the Prince and your Sister hold intelligence; and 'twas her
command, and Count Martino counseled, that your Highness should not build too
much upon the seeming friendship of the Prince; who but ill brooks the love and
trust your Highness has in Millain; and those that will strike at your honor
thus, she says, would strike at Prince Cosmo, if they durst attempt him


Did not I tell you, that is a Villain.


I find him, and her practice too, fond Girl.


Ha! it is Prince Sforza then that succeeds our General.


What if it be Prince Sforza? what is that to me; who has heard me question his
merits? or wish one glory from his growing greatness? why then should he look
with envious eyes on mine? are honors so scarce in the Court of Millain, that
they must rob a stranger, ere they can pay their Debts to their Prince? let
them build him Trophies of their Love, till his envied fame grows great as his
mind; I shall not repine at it, so I be not injured; who ever heard Cosmo
repeat the ruin he suffered in the war betwixt Millain and Pavia, because I
was then their enemy? and though I lost my Country, I kept my honor. But when
they will call me friend, and injure me; smile in my face, and stab me; wish
health to Cosmo, and put poison in his cup; the world must pardon me, if then
my passion grows untame; when I see they aim to make me the basis to build
another greatness on; which ere I will suffer, I Will raise a storm shall shake
the proudest in their proudest thoughts. Antonio, follow me


This I looked not for; I must find him.


This mischief I foresaw; it is easy to read Julia's craft; the malice of a
bloody and an ambitious woman is clearly to be discovered. Oh, Giovanni, the
ruin that threatens this State must have sudden, honest, and bold remedies;
and we must wear our swords ready for all occasions


It Is apparent her design is to break the friendship between the two Princes;
and I am confident, Sforza has no hand in this injury done to our General;
therefore let us haste to Pavia, and acquaint Prince Sforza with what has past,
whither I believe Cosmo is gone; his nature is too fiery to sleep upon such a
conceived injury


Agreed: But let us pass by Millain, and observe what face the Court wears
toward the Soldiers; that will instruct us how to proceed; for my fears
apprehend some sudden mischief


The Duke speechless, no sign of life, but warmth?


The Physician bad me tell you, that he apprehends this relapse will be mortal.


If he should die, 'twould cross all our designs; Carlo is absent too: this
chance distracts me; saw you the Duchess


No, Sir, but one was dispatched to call her.


Haste to the Physician, and the Guards; command them strictly to admit no
visits, till I come


O Martino, we are lost, for ever lost, if suddenly we attempt not some brave
rescue; and the plot we have so gloried in (our breaking the friendship betwixt
my Son and Sforza) as 'twas then the way to compass our ends, if the Duke dies,
it will be our utter ruin


What says your Messenger, how did he leave him?


The Impostume brake, and he was almost strangled ere they found it; and he
left him speechless, and void of reason; and he must find sudden ease, or death


But why this distraction, Madam? think you I have not thought of all the
remedies that either our power or craft can propose? thinks your Highness that
Martino is so dull, as to sleep in this storm where you and Cosmo are
threatened? No, Madam, I am too proud and kind to quit the Helm, which thus long
your favor has put in my hands


What then does thy soul prompt thee to? is there a hope left we may gain
Sforza to our party


No, no; that thought is vain and desperate; Sforza is not to be wrought upon;
were he a coward I would fright him from the Throne; or were he a fool, I would
flatter him till his heart were tame, and then rock him asleep, and insensibly
rob him of a Crown. But these charms have no power upon him, his sullen
nature's proof against them and lust: yet if Fidelia would join, that bait
might engage his soul,; for I know he loves her; and if she would be wise
enough to listen to her own good, I would not doubt our success. Did you move
it to her


Yes, yes; But hell upon her, she is too cold, she was changed, sure, in the
Cradle; No child of mine could be so unseasonably virtuous; when I urged it to
her with all the kindness and interest of a Mother; Showed her that all her
past glories, present honors and safety depended upon her consent; she urged
conscience and the Gods, and a thousand strange examples of their judgments
upon such actions. In short, I fear she is honest; and therefore neither to be
trusted, nor tempted longer


Hell take her and her froward conscience; let her live and dye a fool, and
slave to Sforza, since she prefers a Maidenhead before a Crown. Secret is
honesty enough for any woman; and since there is no other remedy, they both
must dye; I have ordered to admit no visits; and if he dye, we must conceal it
till Sforza be dead, which is the only counsel our extremity admits.


That was spoke like a friend to Julia; now I find my youth did not err in her
choice; nor do I grudge that bounty or love that purchased Martino's
friendship, -- Sforza must dye, was it not so thou said


Yes, Madam, he must dye, it is the only remedy; if he get the Crown, we are
short lived


Sforza get the Crown? has Jul. quitted all her peace, all her honor, and her
God, to make her Cosmo great; and after that, shall she see him stoop to
Sforza; I had rather those limbs were torn by a Hangman


Put off your fears, and calm this passion; it is resolved, Sforza shall dye,
and your Highness laugh at his Tragedy, whose thoughts are big with hopes of
our misery


These words have given life to my dying hopes; and could I hear thee say
Sforza was dead, Julia were then Mistress of all her wishes; and till I do hear
that music in thy voice, the fear that he should live master of Cosmo and
thee, makes my joy faint; for know, I have set up my rest; and we will stand
the greatest, or fall the wicked'st in Millain. O Martino, can thou call to
thy mind that sad day, when I kneeled a petitioner at great Matthia's feet (thy
dead Lord and mine) the private estate I then mourned, gathered from his first
looks ambitious hopes, which with such art I managed, that ere I had my story
told with tears and youth, so cunningly I pleaded, that he left to be Caesar,
and rather obeyed, then granted what I sought; but Love was my aid then, Love
moved in these eyes; and so powerful were those tears, his heart was struck
with the sad object; but these eyes had fire in them then, Martino, Fire, such
as that misery could not cloud, such as those tears could not quench; But to
his bed they lighted Julia, Pavia's Duke I ruled, and upon a cruel Brother
took a deep Revenge; High was the Fame of Julia's Beauty then, when all bowed
to Julia, and observed her rising, as if the day had broke from these Eyes to
whose power all stooped; Yet then, Martino, my Martino, in midst of all these
glories commanded Julia


Why do you repeat this, Madam? Do you believe your Servant wants spurs? Are
not our Interests equal? Is there any thing can attempt me to be ungrateful


No, Martino, not that I fear thy gratitude, but to call to thy Memory thy dead
friends; That I was handsome is but a weak Argument; and if thou should prove
forgetful, Julia would not frown upon thee, because she knows it is vain and
idle; frowns Caesar in his Marble, which to none terror bears


Take heed how you encourage me to be false; Men, when they fear no punishment,
are seldom faithful for Honors sake; and if I should be false, what would you
do?


Mourn, and conjure thee to thy faith again, by all those past pleasures, by
all those joys which I have brought thee, by our stolen sweetes, and those
envied embraces which we so often have expired in, and beg of thee not to add
to the miseries of time; Julia, as thou wast wont to do; when thou would
swear by what in Heaven and Earth thou lovd'st and feard'st most, Julia would
then fall from thy Tongue, and tears from thy Eyes; And, if in those days my
kindness obliged a gallant man, thou would again return to thy friend


No more, Fate and Martino shall change together; I am still your Highnesses;
command me and prove my faith, though it be to fix this Poniard in Sforza's
heart


No, no, Martino, I will bear a part in all; I require no single danger from
you, but only to join with me: For thou art one my thoughts labor to preserve
rather then to hazard; and when we can gain our ends safely, then I again
conjure you to join with me to make our Cosmo great; for to me he is dearer
then all that the Earth shows, or the Sea hides; Because he is the fruit of our
Love; it is for my dear Cosmo, thy Cosmo, it is for him I plead; And by thy part
of that pleasing sin, by that beloved fault which Cosmo is; By that dear crime,
which I cannot, nay will not repent, because 'twas thine, let us resolve to
pursue our design: That we may leave our Cosmo great as our Loves, lest envious
lookers on, in these days, should scorn our past greatness, and laughing say,
Julia and Martino's glory was as mortal as her beauty, which is the common Fate
of Women


No more, Julia, By this -- and this, my Julia is to me still all Pleasure, all
Beauty, all sweetness; O thou excellently


Love and Ambition know no Laws; a Mistress and a Crown have no certain way;
Election, Birth, Sword, all are good. Nothing was ever called Treason, when the
Traitors stood; Laws are fit to bind the people, Princes are above them, and
the wisest make them their servants; The sacrifice was the peoples expiation,
and so sacred, they might not touch what they offered, yet what they offered
was to the Priest but food


Thou have fired my Soul, and I long to see Sforza Earth. Baptista shall
suddenly put in execution the plot we resolved on; he will this Evening be at my
Lodging, and all things agree to make it hit; For Sforza is this day to set out
from Pavia, which will give an occasion fit for our design; our doubt was,
where to attempt him; 'twas my opinion in the wood, when he is past the River;
But Count Baptista believes 'twill be safer, when he passes the Ferry; I have
whetted him on with repeating of his Injuries; and Carlo has so confirmed him,
that his banishment was procured by Sforza (who is now his Rival in Fidelia's
Love) that he is ready for any mischief, so she may be his reward, which we
assured him, with a Restitution to all his Possessions when Cosmo reigned,
which must be performed


Yes, if there be no way to remove him when the work is done; for he is of too
bold a Nature to be trusted with such a secret


That is a danger not ill foreseen; for such men, if not rewarded as they
desire, still cry, They gave the Crown, and think they are never paid till they
have the gift again


Sure I am greater then I was; this Faith in my Friend has renewed my years; if
not in me, yet it has in thee, faithful, kind Martino, who now appear'st
lovely, as Bacchus in his Wine; when the well-natur'd God looked kindly on the
faults of the false Theseus; and I could wish all the forsaken Beauty of
Ariadne, to add to what time has withered here, and thou that Gods desire,
blown by his own fire, that Julia might meet thee again, and again overflow thy
heart with Joy


What news begets this haste? where is Cosmo?


He left the Camp enraged at the Letters, and threatens a Revenge against
Sforza; and if not prevented, I fear, in his own Person he will attempt it;
there is no body but Antonio with him


Watch his coming to Court, and give me notice, that I may lay my command upon
him, not to venture himself in such a danger


That thought is vain; Pray take no notice of his intention, nor seem to intend
his prevention, lest he suspect it and steal privately away; Leave the care to
me, I will have the guard ready; and as soon as he enters the Court, we will
seize him in the Dukes name, and make him a Prisoner at my Chamber, till Sforza
be gone his long Journey


You must lose no time in that design neither; for it is certain, Sforza sets
out this day; have you resolved where we shall set upon him


Either in the Wood, or as he passes the Poe.


You know, 'twas the Count Baptista's opinion, the River was best; for the Act
once done, 'twas but sinking the Boat, and the waters being high, they may have
time to escape to Pavia


Prithee call him, he is now at my Chamber, and we will resolve.


No, Sir, Pray let him not be seen in this public place; his disguise is not
proper for you to hold discourse with, it may beget suspicion; within he shall
attend you


I will to the Duke, to keep all visits from him but death, who could never
have come unwelcome till now; had he waited on Sforza first, we might then have
lighted at his Funeral my Martino's Hymeneal Torch


Spoke like my great Mistress; and it is my glory that I serve such a Soul: But
lose no time; let Baptista be instructed, that is the hinge on which all this
glorious work must move, and Crown Prince Cosmo; which will make Divine-formed
Julia great in Story


Away Carlo, call Baptista to the Duchess Cabinet, where we will expect you.


HAteful Habit! loathed form! scorned fortune! wretched Baptista, disgraced,
banished, and despised by her I Love! O Heaven! Is there no way to conquest but
through the miseries of the Innocent? My crime to this State was my faith to my
dead prince and kinsman; which too well Martino and false Julia know; if they
had any gratitude for his memory, they might long since have dispersed this
cloud, having absolute power in Millain; But they are false as Cowards bred in
blood and Lust together; Yet now their dangers begin to approach they fawn upon
Baptista; and to gain their ends, promise more then Passengers in storms, or a
prodigal to his Whore, when Beauty and high rough Seas plead in their Lusts and
fears. And now I will dissemble too; and be as blind as the Scene requires;
neither see nor hear ought but what they show or tell; Not that I will believe
thee Martino; but I have my ends too in Sforza's death; 'Twas that proud Boy
eclipsed all my glories, and left me thus a naked shrub; 'twas he that like
untimely frosts killed all my forward hopes in dear Fidelia; for whose sake,
Fate spins no thread so fine but I dare cut it; and for her sake he shall die.
-- See where she comes; This is all the joy I have, this sight makes me endure
my misery


This disgrace of Cosmo's amazes me; Prince Sforza too, is called home; and the
Duke fallen into a relapse; When I consider these accidents, I am able to give
my self so little satisfaction, that I cannot but fear there is some foul play
intended; for I know Martino cannot but apprehend the Prince in both, Oh! this
thought has fears which Heaven protect the Prince from


All blessings of mind and Fortune fall upon the Excellent Fidelia, till the
abundance equal that Excess of beauty that strikes the world, for being so
charitable to her daily Beads-man


I am not uncharitable -- yet my heart affects not that fellow; Heaven pardon
me, if I judge amiss; But methinks he deserves his Curse; nor did I ever yet
give him a willing Alms; Yet Maria, give him something. What said he?


I know not, Madam.


O sister, send off thy Maid, till I relate my fears; Martino is a Villain, a
bloody and a subtle Traitor; and if not ptevented, will ruin all that is
virtuous in this Court


Oh my divining soul! whence spring thy fears, Gentle Victoria?


Passing through the Privy Gallery to my Fathers Chamber, which you know joins
upon your Mothers Cabinet, I heard some laugh, which made me curious to listen;
where I heard such light airy things as suit not with these times, nor our
distracted fortunes; and one (I will not name) with wicked mirth made mention
of those dangers that now besiege my fathers life; At which my anger made me
look, to see who they were; more amazed at the sight, then at the sound of
those words: For the old beggar (we use to give our Alms to) was with them; He
stood upright, no age nor wrinkles in his Face, nor silver hair on head or
beard; he whispered something to the Duchess, at which she laughed; and I
could hear the Villain say, by to morrow Sunset she should see no air of
Sforza; and to his horrid wish bloody Martino said, Amen. But that which most
cuts my soul, was, to find the Duchess of this Council


Oh! Madam: That Villain I have long trembled at, fearing his counsel would at
last tend to some horrid mischief; she is my mother, I shall therefore neither
Judge nor revile her; though my heart weeps for her; let heaven speak to her,
and tell her what Duty she owes to them, and give me piety enough to pay mine
to her


Dear sister, do not weep; I came not to afflict you, but to Counsel, with you,
how I might save the Innocent


Oh Madam! to what misery was I reserved? when your noble Brother saved us, and
gave his Charity to those that armed against him; would I had died with my
Father, with that peace and Innocence I then enjoyed; I shall live now till
none will pity me; None will mourn when I die, nor shed a tear for poor
Fidelia; In that day Millain will burn fires of joy; no Funeral-torch shall
light the sad mourners from my Obsequies


Your griefs are now unseasonable, pray defer them, and consider what is to be
done to save my brother from their Malice; Your commands are more powerful far
then mine, I will not doubt a sisters Interest; Let us write our fears, and
assure him that there is a Plot laid for his life, and acquaint him with the
relapse, and sudden danger that my father is fallen into; he will then know
how necessary his presence must be here; but counsel him to come privately in
some disguise, and we will expect him at your Chamber; while you write this, I
will call Phillipine, to whose care we will give it


I shall; and it is one joy, I am not so lost in your Opinion but that your
highness dares trust me with your fears, though my Mother be part of them; If I
keep that value with the Prince too, I shall not be so miserable as my fears
would persuade me


'TWas she, and the Princess Victoria; I will observe till she goes to her own
Chamber. I dare not see the Princess; my love has too much folly and softness;
When I behold her she calls to my mind, it is her brother that has injured me;
and that thought distracts me; Yet I must not tamely bear this Injury, nor
rudely dispute it with her I love; But for Fidelia, a Sister that I have loved
above my Eyes; that she should join in my disgrace, is a Return I could not
have feared from any thing that I have valued like Fidelia -- She comes, I will
not be seen


Till night, Madam, I will take my leave, lest our being together beget
suspicion


Fidelia, Sister.


Brother? well-come, What Accident calls you to Millain?


My Injuries, which I hear you are no stranger to, Fidelia.


What was it you said, Sir?


I am told you are no stranger to the affront that brings me hither; for it is
said, you love Prince Sforza, sister


I heard you, Sir, at first; But was loath to understand you; and it is said,
you hate Prince Sforza, brother


Hate him? Nay I scorn to hate him; When I am angry I dare be revenged; Nor
will Cosmo think this anger away; That I hate him is false


And why may not I be scandal'd too?


If 'twere false, why do you hold Correspondence with him has wronged your
brother


I know he has not Injured you, and therefore I hold correspondence with him.


I know, he has: poorly, and by Whispers, wrought my disgrace in my absence;
and by detraction robbed me of that Faith his Father gave me; It Is Sforza has
made me suspected: But I shall prove my self honester then he dares be


Honester then he? I would thou could.


Yes, then he, or any that dares avow this disgrace done to Cosmo, and to their
teeth tell them so; and they dare as soon beard a Lion, naked, as maintain their
Injury


He is the gallanter man; Dare you maintain an Injury?


I dare, as much as he.


And more; for he dares not use a Sister thus; Go tell him what you dare do;
you will find him your equal in Honor, and in Arms


He is not.


Come, he is. Remember Pavia, and the life he gave you; Remember me, and my
honor, which he saved, When neither your sword nor passion could protect it


You are angry, Sister.


No, Sir; I never yet met that man so rude, nor Injury so wild, could raise my
Anger; Yet I confess, I have so much share in Cosmo's faults, that they wound
me; Thou art abused, and when it is too late thou will find it; and if my words
had faith with Cosmo, I would tell thee thy Courage and all that is Gallant and
Honorable in thee (Those strengths given to defend thee) are by the malice and
Craft of those Traitors whom thou trustest, armed against thee; And because
they durst not attempt thee, they have raised Cosmo against himself, and this
Civil-war will ruin thee


I understand not this complement; are you with me, or against me?


In the Princes cause against the world; for I know he is Innocent; and if you
were your self, I could clear all these doubts


My self? what disorders are there in my words or actions, that makes your
partial eyes find the Madman in a Brother


Unmanly ones, such as in Prince Sforza I should hate, but in Cosmo I pity them.


You are my Sister that says this.


Do thou not blush to say so, with that cloudy brow? would any gallant man
look upon a Sister so, with such a storm in his Forehead, and Eyes full of
Anger? Would any man show this Rage to a Sister, whose Sex can scarce modestly
be angry? But that, and all the Injuries thou can do me, I can pardon;
because I know there is a Tempest in thy Heart, craftily raised by those that
hate thee


Oh Fidelia! I am wronged, disgraced, my Country lost, and all the Credit I had
with the Duke blasted; my Command is taken from me by Prince Sforza and his
Party


Thou art deceived, Cosmo: Yet I know you are wronged, and my Heart has bled
for it; But why you should punish me Fidelia, that had no Joy left but in her
Innocence, and Cosmo's Love; Why pursue me, that never in thought wronged you
or any man; Me, a Virgin and a Sister, oppressed with miseries, and rudely thus
throw your wild words at me; And your self (a Brother) become the Author of a
scandal that thy Honor should have engaged thee to tear from a strangers
Heart! But now since you have defamed me, who shall fear to blot Fidelia's
Name, when Cosmo a Brother shall be known to revile her? They say, you are in
Love with Prince Sforza. Oh Cosmo! when thou said it, thy Eyes were red, and
thy Heart called me Whore; And had not you expressed a want of value for your
Sister, who durst have ventured the defaming of Fidelia so: The man was never
born durst venture to tell me Cosmo was a Coward; And had mine honor been as
precious to thee, thou would have killed that poysoner of my fame; yet, I
here declare, the only glory of my heart, is, the friendship she has gained
from Prince Sforza


Oh, Fidelia, Fidelia! pardon thy unfortunate Brother, and let my distracted
mind plead my peace with thee; though the injuries I have received would force
an Anchorite from his Cell, and with broken vows break all Laws of Gods or Men,
rather then not find a revenge: Read that Letter, and be your self the Judge.


If this Letter find your faith, We are lost; it is Martino's falsehood. Oh, that
Serpent, which but now begins to throw his venom out! the Prince sue for your
Command? (did you desire the Government of Pavia?


Fidelia, I ask your counsel; I am not now fit for your mirth.


Do you know this hand? pray read it.


I work underhand, to gain the Government of Pavia, as I did the Army of
Millain? it is false, false as Hell, both; and through the earth I will hunt him
with my sword, till I have taken revenge of him that dares accuse me of one
treacherous thought


Do you now perceive the mischief they aim at, that have made this remove in
your Commands? Martino and Carlo cannot gain their ends, while the Prince and
you are friends. You have both too much honor, while you love each other, to
listen to their mischiefs: but being once blinded with anger, their false
pretenses may find a faith, which you and all may live to repent. The Prince is
as great a stranger to his being General, as you are to the Government of
Pavia; yet when 'twas labored to make him believe you were the cause of his
remove; his friendship would neither believe, nor suffer such a scandal to be
laid on Cosmo


Is this truth, Fidelia? or feigned, only to keep me from taking my revenge
where you have a friendship


No, Cosmo; I will call no man friend that dares do a treacherous act, or fears
to justify his own innocence; and if you think otherwise, Go to Pavia, find
the Prince, and satisfy your doubts; only thus much I beg; for my sake be not
hasty, nor injurious in your words, but clearly tell your griefs; Courage and
Reason should tread the same paths; else you may lose your way, though justice
guide you


I shall obey your counsel; for I know him valiant, and full of honor; and
though we both love him, if he wrong me, I must not bear it, Fidelia


Alas, Sir, I am none of that fond kind of women, that would save a Brother
ingloriously; nor have I said this, to bid thee not fight with any man that
wrongs thee. For I know my Brother fortunate in fight; nor do I fear, or doubt
his sword against any single enemy; and though I would bet upon his arm against
the world; yet I would counsel him to let honor guide him, and never to
detract from any enemy: For it lessens thy triumph when thou art victor; but if
overcome, then a scorn follows the loss. -- See who comes here; can that
softness calm your heart, or will it swell against her too


She staggers all my resolution; I must not stay: I hope your Highness does not
believe me guilty of the injuries I stand accused of to Prince Sforza


I am so far, Sir, from believing, I am to blush for those my Brother is taxed
for; but I hope you see from whence that malice takes its root; Martino is a
villain


It Is visible I am injured; and when I thought Prince Sforza did it, my anger
then was just. But Fidelia has made me lay by that anger, till I have spoken
with his Highness: And I know the Prince is so gallant, he will not love me the
less for seeing me sensible of an affront; For nothing can confirm him better
that I will do no injuries, then to see that I will take none; for to appear
worthy of such a friendship, is, to let him know I am not afraid to be his
enemy


Why was he so harsh to me? --


Sir, this is but civil anger; and I must not go till you promise me, not to be
an enemy to my Brother


By your self, I swear (to Cosmo of all Oaths that binds most powerful) never
to be an enemy to Prince Sforza till he injures me; and then to be patient is
neither the way to honor nor safety


I am satisfied, so you will let some other, and not your own passion, be judge
of those injuries


Be your Highness always judge of them and me.


I Fear Argentin is not so full of honor as my wife should be: A drunken
Thedes-key, one of those wandering Tramontanes, whose business in the world is
Wine Whores and Horseflesh; one of these, at first sight, called her by her
name, and talked of old stories, such as would make a jealous man smell of the
horn; if she be one of those that cannot say no, what a Trade shall I drive,
that have the carrying over mine own horns, by Boatloads; but if I find her
trading, By St. John, I Will spade her


That Is a sly Rogue too; I durst not go to gather boughs for my


I, now you cog; but I have not forgot that you gave Moretta the shirt the
Dutchman left behind him


Will this jealous humor never wear out? Come, and if you be true steel,
Mistress, let us in, and strike fire; and I


So, so; this will come to somewhat, shortly; I shall prefer you, Bertolin, the
French-way; I shall; which is, fleay you, and send you to serve the Grand Duke,
Sirrah; I shall, if I catch you in this saucy fit again, of playing with my
wife


Alas, Sir, we were but talking of the Dutchmen, that knew my Mistress when
she was a brave Girl; he that drank a pound of Candles to her health


And whither is she gone now? to find that fine Dutchman.


No, Sir, she is gone to the wood,


I know her mind now; and if I would consent to her Roguery, I might gain my
own ends the better; 'twere but giving her an occasion, and taking an
opportunity my self, for Moretta is as willing as I am, and see where she
comes, -- Dispatch, and get the boughs ready


I shall, Sir, and it shall go hard but I will make a Rod for your Tail, out of
them


My Mistress is so jealous of her Bauble, and so covetous of another, that
poor Moretta starves for a little of either; yet the Master or the Man are
willing to relieve my hunger; she is a woman would fain change, and keep her
own too. Yonder is my Master, how handsome he appears, now there is none but
he! (thus brown bread is good when one has a stomach) she is vanished, and
Bertolin gone; now for a charm to try him


Moretta.


Sir.


Quickly, and softly, a kiss, Wench.


O dear, Master, take ten, and ask them afterward, every word would make a
dozen


Let us look where the old spy is.


She is gone to gather boughs.


Come Wench, a kiss, and in, lest we lose this minute.


WE are the strangest unlucky, every body is willing, and yet none can meet; we
know each others minds too well; now for a minute, I have a jobbe of work here,
a minute would do it, and a design in my pate to cure all their jealousies, by
giving them full satisfaction of their doubts. Here comes my Mistress, I must
be kind to her; and she comes on as easy as my old slippers


There he stands, and we are alone; if he should offer, how shall I do for a
where withal to deny him


Mistress, there is an old suit depending; I am poor Bertolin still, but a most
sufficient able Lover, that has --


You staid for me here now. -- I, I, dissemble, 'dissemble; where is your
Master?


He is gone home.


And what do you hanker for? I saw the boughs at the door; Prince Sforza will
be past before you have trimmed or made clean the Boat


I would that you would but step in with me, and help to set up the boughs; I
have a trick, if you would but join, Mistress, would tickle you till you laugh
again.


I thought 'twas such trick; why so, is this a time to fool away in tricks and
kissing


Say you so? I would we were but on the other side the water; if you will go, we
will put the Boat a drift; and when the work is done we will call for help


I am willing to do thee a kindness, but I dare not be long absent; for I fear
my husband should come home in the mean time, and fall aboard Moretta


That is a Whore in her heart; let me alone to watch her; we will be back
before them


THere is no safety here, it is my Mistress that watches us.


Whither shall we go then, to be private?


Send my Mistress to the wood, for boughs; and when Bertolin comes home, make
him stay for his breakfast; step you to the Boat, and lie privately, I will
come to you


Thou will not fail.


This in earnest. Farewell, make haste, and send home Bertolin; see where he
comes with his boughs


Whither are you going?


To the Boat with these boughs.


Where is your Mistress?


In the wood, gathering more boughs.


More boughs, what to do? unless you were certain the Prince would come.


A Gallant told me so, that knew my Mistress before you.


A pox of his knowledge, and memory too; there is neither of them honest.


Pray, let me go; and if you were as well laden as I am, you'de have little
lust to talk under such a burden; I have more upon my back then you are aware
of


Lay them down, and go break your fast, and then call home your Mistress; there
is boughs enough, one would think


Boughs enough? why, it is none of your pains, to gather them; cannot you let one
make the Boat handsome when the Prince is to pass


You are always thus troublesome.


Let me carry these aboard, and then I will call home my Mistress.


Leave your prating, and lay down your Boughs, and go now and call her home;
for if I lace your Coat 'twill be less easier then your plain one


I will not go alone, where she is; you will be in your old jealous humor, and
mistrust something, as you did the other night


Away, you are a fool; give me the Boughs, and make haste.


I will not quit my Boughs; you do things so by halfes still.


Your Breakfast is ready; why do you dispute thus with him, you know it is a
wilful fool, let him go, you lose time


Well, Sirrah, make haste, and come down to Breakfast.


Mistress, Mistress, don't you stink for fear? I assure you I do.


Bertolin, dear Bertolin, quick, quick, quick, unbind, unbind, dispatch that I
may run home, I would not endure such another fright for all the wealth in
Pavia


Yes, and then you will be gone and laugh at Bertolin; no faith, you must even
be patient, Mistress; I will not lose my labor and my longing too; it is an
opportunity has cost me too dear to be thrown away


Dear Bertolin, I can do nothing now; for the truth is, I am loose in my belly
with the fright


Are you gilt, Mistress?


Dear Bertolin, another time command me.


Courage, Mistress, it is a sign of good luck you know.


No, no, Bertolin, as thou love me let me go; unbind me or I will cry out.


Do, and proclaim it, one loud syllable more and I am gone; and here I will
leave you like a Bird in a bush, 'twill be a credit for you, I need only swear
I have not touched you, and vehemently swear we were honest; That is the new
fashion way of telling, which the Gallants use of late


I am undone, I am undone for ever.


Not, if you will be quiet; for I am as secret as any boathook.


He is gone aboard, and when he comes back to Breakfast, my Master and I will
be merry in the Arbor


If ever I trust you again, Bertolin.


You hope I will deceive you thus; why now you I am your faithful Bertolin,
for being a gracious Mistress endears me;


You had best tell him so; Prithee unbind, that I may get home; so, so, look
out and see whether the coast be clear, for I am afraid Moretta and he should
meet, for she is a Jade -- Was not that her voice?


Yes, by this hand.


Look out, quick.


It Is she coming this way, quickly, let me tie the cord and lie still till she
be gone


A pox upon her for a crafty Whore, she suspects something.


Be quiet, and all will be well, I warrant you.


Why do you not come to Breakfast? my Master stays for you, what are you
studying


It Is resolved I will do it, and then they are both at my devotion; they will
fear me, and not dare accuse me, nor tell of each other


Now I am alone with him, methinks, he is lovelier then my Master; Lord, how
handsome any Man is, when a Woman is in my Case.


Moretta, you understand me, else this occasion may prompt you; Prithee lay thy
hand upon these Boughs


Why should I be coy? Here is an opportunity, and it is good to be sure of one;
and in this case to take the Man is Wisdom, when the Master is uncertain


You are dumb now, there may be more Dutchmen, and more shirts; however, there
are Trees and Ropes enough in Pavia to ease a Lovers Heart


You do well to complain first, and judge by your self; Alas, I do not see my
Mistress, I am blind


Mistress? where?


Where? you know where, in your Heart, dissembler.


By this day, I had thought she had seen her. By this kiss, I am all thine,
only I was angry and vexed to see thee cast Eyes upon my Master; But we will
forgive each other, grow wise, from past follies take occasion by the lock, and
laugh at the old Woman


Till you are next alone, and then this Story shall entertain her.


Do thou take me for a Devil, false to my Love?


Hark, I hear my Masters voice.


Bertolin, Bertolin, she stays long; If the Rogue should mow her to my hand,
I have carried my business finely, to make my self his Baud; I have no
patience, I will to the Door and call him


So, you had best brag, and tell leather face, my Mistress, with her spiders
breath, what I have done. --


Hark, I heard my Masters voice.


Be gone, I will follow you.


Farewell, little Rogue, till another time, but I will watch your water; how my
Mistress storms: Now if my Master will take an opportunity, and employ Moretta
upon the Boughs, what a Comfort 'twill be to my Mistress, 'till cure both
their Jealousies -- he comes, and I am gone


Where is this idle Villain?


I know not, I found him talking in's sleep here to himself, laid all along
upon the Boughs; But he is gone I think to call home my Mistress


But is he gone? Peep Wench, be sure, lest the Enemy surprise us.


But look you keep your promise now; You shall not have my Maidenhead till you
swear not to suffer my Mistress to beat me any more, nor dominere over me
though she be jealous


Beat thee? By this light, I will sew up her tail like young Kites for spoil,
if she but lift her Tongue against thee


Will she not come, think you?


No, no, hang her old Trot; Come Wench, whither shall we go?


Help me pull in the Boughs, and then I will talk with you; but you must be
very civil


It Is done; lucky mischief as I could wish; O the knavery and the sport of this
Jest, besides, my Revenge on all three: Now Bertolin is Master, and can have
which he will. O for a fine familiar Devil to tell my Mistress thoughts; would
I had so much money as she would give to be revenged, or as I would refuse,
rather then hold my tongue; I will steal off, and give them the Alarm. Cry
only, my Mistress comes


A Boy, or Girl, Wench, for a pair of Gloves.


Neither, for two pair, a pox on it; it is no marvel my Mistress is so jealous; By
this light, he would press twenty women to death, ere he made one Quick


What say thou, am not I a young man still? and a bountiful Lover, for a man
of my hair


By my troth, Sir, if you took no more then you laid out I think there had
been little spent to day


A wag, a wag; But I shall see thy belly swell; if it prove a Boy, we will call
him Trevallin the second


These old men think the best of themselves, and they have reason; for if their
faith were no stronger then their works they were damned


A kiss, a kiss, Wench. -- I am betrayed, undone, undone.


My Act, for my freedom, quickly, your Seal-Ring, and Reversion of the Ferry,
all the ready money in the house, and Moretta for my wife; Or all goes to the
Inquisitor, and my Mistress, he cannot cuckold me; I have both their words for
it


I am undone.


Is it a Bargain? or I am gone.


Be ruled, Sir, all is undone, I will consent rather then be dishonored; But
if I be not revenged on him when I am married


But will you be faithful, and secret, when this is done? and not tell my wife!


Hah! what house do you take me to be of? Is Bertolin of so little reputation
in the world, as to proclaim my own horns my self? Hang her, Trot, she shall
know nothing unless you tell her


I tell her? the Devil I will.


Sure, it is as probable you may have the vanity to say, you made my wife a
whore, as I to tell it


Be but secret, and all is agreed.


Is it a match, Moretta?


Yes, by this kiss.


Make haste, and let us part before she comes, she will be so jealous else.


No, no, stay you two here, and stick up the Boughs; I told her you were
making ready the Boat; fetch out the boughs Moretta, and dispatch, I will
return strait


This slave will tell her yet.


What will he tell? am not I his wife?


But shall not I be well-come still, when we can delude the old Woman.


Yes, but we must be secret, for he is a sullen Rogue, I cannot these boughs
out, he has bound them so fast together, pray lend me your knife to cut the
string


There, let me help thee.


Fetch me some more boughs.


Ha! what is here? my wife?


Yes, impudence; Oh, that I were loose?


Did you call, Sir? my Mistress will be here presently.


I am abused, but I shall be revenged; This is your Villainy, Sirrah.


Ha! my Mistress in the boughs! she can tell fine stories then.


Yes, you double Whore; oh, for a Rat to gnaw this Cord.


Sieze them, and bind them; so, strip those Fellows, and bring their Clothes.


Alas, Sir; my skin will never hold dressing; if your worship has use of a
skin, pray take my Masters; he is a notable thick-skin'd knave, and so tough
with the yellow, it is almost tanned


Hah! What have we here, a bird in a bush? Away, gagg them; and lay them in the
hole, behind the Hermitage, and follow me


NO more, Richardo.


Sir, it is my Love and Duty that makes me urge it.


I believe it; but no more, I know you are abused.


Sir, I have letters here second yours, and from your best Friends, such whose
affection, Faith, nor duty, ought to be suspected; They are full of Amaze and
Wonder, to find your Highness will so tamely consent to lose a Country that
cost so much blood to purchase; Was not Cosmo born Prince of Pavia? how think
you, Sir, a man of his Spirit, and Title to the Place, should consent to hold
his birthright for another? You are deceived, Sir; Nor were Cosmo fit for your
Friendship, if his Spirit could grow so tame and degenerate, as to set a Slave
upon his Fathers Throne; Come, Sir, it is Flattery and dissimulation, and they
are all false; this is the opinion of your best Friends


Take heed, Richardo; yet your love pleads in this indiscretion; but do not
presume; You know, I dare be angry, though it be long before a friend can find
it; your faith shall privilege you to as much freedom as any Subject can
pretend with his Prince; but impertinency and rudeness no discreet man will
Commit. Had thou said, Julia, Carlo, and Martino had been false, thou had
found my faith; for I know they have wrought my disgrace, and it is their
business to break the Friendship betwixt Prince Cosmo and my self; and against
those Traitors thy words would have raised a Tempest in my heart; For against
that Villain Martino, (till my Revenge finds him) even my soul makes War; for I
know him ungrateful, bloody, and all the several ills that make a Villain are
met in that inhumane Wretch, and my very dreams arm against him; But when thou
say all are false, including the Princess Fidelia; That Scandal questions
the truth of that guilt which the rest are condemned for; No, Richardo, she has
no share in that Treachery, she is all softness; piety and virtue are so
natural to her that, for her sake, I can scarce be angry with the rest; For
when her name but crosses my thought's, I can do nothing with Passion, save
love Fidelia; Oh, Friend, thou dos't not know that Noble mind; and when thou
shall be acquainted with her thou will confess; The Princess Fidelia's virtues
were given her, as Cordials, to defend us against the Poison of her Family; and
if thou love Sforza, Honor and serve the Princess


Since your Highness is sure of her faith I shall not fail to pay that respect
and honor that is due to her; for my displeasure was only grounded upon the
thought she was ungrateful to your Highness; yet I see not how you can acquit
Cosmo


Prithee, peace, he is her Brother; and I know he has Courage and honor, and
such are only guilty by chance; But suppose him as false as you believe him, I
shall be more troubled that he can do an ill Action, (because I love him) then
for any injury he dares do me; For I wear a sword, Richardo, which will heal
all those injuries; and therefore let us not trouble our selves with much those
lesser thoughts at Millain; we shall have time to inform our selves


SO, dispatch; and some one look out, lest some call to pass; how the old whore
beat the fellow


She had reason; for the slave made her husband lie with the Maid upon her back.


Nay, he lay with her himself upon her back, after he had layen with his
Mistress


'Twas his trick, to get his Mistress into the boughs; and then the ill-natured
Rogue left her, for her husband to find her


What a dog 'twas? But she has punished him.


He Will be dead ere night, for I have bound them together, and left her hands
loose


She will kill him then.


No matter, hang him Rogue; tell when his Mistress does him a Courtesy? I would
all that do so were so served


That folly makes us pay dear; for, by this light, the fear of telling keeps
more women honest, then fear of Purgatory; But it is time to be gone, I hear
some body call


Ferryman, is the Boat on this side?


Yes, Sir.


Ha! Phillipin? e Victoria's Page, what business has he at Pavia? I must know;
Some intelligence upon my life. Sir, if you will walk to the Boat; we will
follow you


Make haste then; Is Prince Sforza past to day.


Not yet, but we Expect him. What, ho, where are these fellows; Do you here. --
seize that youth, and blind him, make


I warrant you, Sir, we will search him.


What can his business be? The Duke perhaps is dead; it must be that, or the
discovery of our design; Why should they be so impatient else? for they Expect
him within these two hours


Nay, resist not, we must have money, Sir; we know the Courtiers want none.


And you will find so little 'twill scarce be worth your


What Is that?


A Letter, directed to no body.


Open it, and see if there be never a token in it.


A pox on it, here is nothing but black and white.


What says it?


For that you must execuse me, for I scorn to read, or write; search, search
his Doublet, let his papers be hanged


A Pox upon you, you would be cudgeld, Sirrah, for offering to wear such
Clothes and carry no money in your Purse, only to cousen good fellows; here
are three of us put fairly for the Gallows, for a Pistol


Let us geld the slave, for hanging out such a bush, when he has no Wine in the
Cellar


Alas, Sir, I must wear what is given me; I am but a Servant.


We shall have you a prating too, when you are on to'ther side.


No truly; give me but my paper, and I will go about my business, and do you no
injury at all, O here it is, I am glad the


Come, will you be gone, we will give you a Cast-ashoar, for your money; but we
are no Ferry-men, my friend; only we farmed it, for an hour; and we shall
leave you to take the possession, if you please, for our work is done


If we had lighted upon nothing but your lean purse, what a purchase we had had?


Dispatch, and away, the Prince is for certain coming; and if he find us here,
we shall pay dear for this reckoning


I must trust them, till I am over.


What miraculous accident was this! all our plot is discovered; but I have
handled it so, that the mischief shall fall upon their own heads; 'twas
Fidelia's hand, it is certain she loves Sforza, she could not else discover her
mother and Family to him. No Baptista, it is visible Sforza had ruined thee; But
if he obey thy counsel, Fidelia, I shall quickly have an Opportunity to take a
full Revenge


There is the Hermits Cell; now to find Baptista; hereabout is a path that
leads to the Ferry, where I am to expect him


So, lie close till they call; that Letter will bring him were death in the way.


That must be he. Baptista?


Carlo, what news?


Read that letter, and 'twill instruct you.


It Is enough; but can you give me no directions how to know him, or guess when
he will come, for we cannot long possess this place; The people that pass will
miss the Ferry-man; But, for the other part of the Letter, there needs no
Conjuration


If they should meet, you know it must be fatal; They have both too much
Courage to part without revenge; and if Cosmo should fall all our hopes must
perish


If he come, I shall not fail of my part, either to persuade or force him to
stay; But Carlo, I tell thee, there has happened such a chance to day that makes
me believe fortune will be kind to us; In short, all Our Resolutions and
Designs are known


It Is not possible.


Deceive not your self, it is known; and yet shall not be prevented: Phillipine
past this Instant with a Letter from Fidelia to Sforza; wherein she assures him
of all our intentions, and by all that is dear to him conjures him to come
privately, in some disguise, this night, to her chamber; where she and his
sister will expect him, and give him a full Relation


And where is the Villain and his Letter?


Gone.


Gone?


Yes gone, and upon good grounds; for knowing Phillipine I made them blind him,
and under the pretense of robbing him, Searched for Letters, and found that;
which having read they pretended Ignorance, I threw it upon the ground; he not
suspecting the secret was discovered took it, and is gone in haste to Sforza.
By which means we shall be sure to act our parts with more Convenience; for I
am confident he will come, and alone


'Twas done like one that knows how to take revenge; Wicked and foolish Girl!
unnatural Fidelia! Betray thy Mother? This news will confirm thy hopes in her;
for now the Duchess will give her you, were it but to vex her, and cross her
hopes in Sforza: Remember Julia, and as soon as you have dispatched; pray, give
notice to the Count Martino, by some trusty


I am instructed, farewell.


I Confess, Antonio, this is the greatest straight that ever cross Fate threw
me upon; for I must now lose my value with Sforza, and the world, or else break
with the Princess Victoria, whom I love above the world; and heaven and she
know my soul has no other ambition but to deserve her favor: But that love
must not make thy friend bear an injury that the world talks of, because she
commands me to be silent; if I do, her reason will hate; and my honor will not
suffer the world to wisper, Cosmo is a coward


Sir, I find many Lovers complain of Love, and the heavy burdens he lays upon
them; yet few or none make haste to discharge themselves, but rather patiently
lie down under their loads; your Highness now complains of two hard Masters,
Love and Honor, and you make a difficulty of obeying either; Reason counsels
you to prefer one, your Passion the other; and to me nothing appears easier then
your part in both; for your Idle thought of coward, Cosmon is know above it;
and if the Princess be all your aim, if her favor be your ambitious hope, as
you say, What need you thus hunt your own dangers, and pursue her Brother, and
your Prince, upon a most unreasonable jealousy; unless you will give
satisfaction to others, by disobliging her that you profess to love and value
above the world


Thou mistakest, Antonio; it is Cosmo loves the Princess, it is not Victoria
loves Cosmo; and obeying her now is but serving my self only; if she loved me,
then for her sake would I put up this injury, because I would not hazard what
she loves; but it is not so; no Antonio, it is Cosmo only that is a Lover; and
Love in a Lover is no obligation nor tie on a Mistress; that is the great
mistake which has so long misled the world; every Lover pretending a reward
from his Mistress, because he loves her; which is most unreasonable; unless he
can say, I will love such a woman, which is impossible and false; for know,
Antonio, that Prince of the mind will not come when he is called, nor go when
he is sent; Love is a blind and stubborn Boy, and his will is his Law;
therefore no woman is obliged to any man for loving her. We owe the root no
thanks, while it lies sleeping in the ground; but when by the spring awakened,
it sends forth its Clusters, then we cherish and admire the Vine, hoping to
taste the rich Elixar. Love is that Root, and Love may bear such Fruit as may
oblige a Mistress, by being diligent, finding and taking all occasions to serve
her; yet then the Lover but obeys his Master; and to a Lover such an Act both
makes and pays the debt; And this Consideration, Antonio, makes me pursue my
first resolution; for since I can pretend nothing from the Princess but what is
due to a person of honor, I must be careful to preserve that honor which is
current through the world; and till the Princess loves Cosmo, I must not let
her kindness to a Brother make me unfit for the friendship or value of that
Brother, by tamely suffering injuries


Sir, I submit; but why should you go thus alone, more now then at other times?
you have heretofor thought me worthy to take a part in your dangers; but 'twas
when your Highness did not grudge me a part in the honor


It Is true, the honor I shall gain from Sforza I will share with none; yet let
me tell thee, it is not that which makes me leave Antonio now; for you must stay
here, and always keep in readiness those Soldiers I spoke with last night, to
execute any design my revenge requires; for I am resolved to hunt the Authors
of this disgrace, though I find them priviledg'd by a Sister, or a Mother


Sir, I am not curious to know more, and so I may serve you, I am indifferent
in the kind or place


Farewell, Antonio; prithee keep a watch about the Princess, and observe what
she and my Sister do; and though you see me through my disguise, at any time,
yet take no notice of me publicly


I shall observe, Sir.


REad there, Richardo, and blush for the ill opinion thou had of the most
excellent Fidelia.


Horrid villain! Sure the Duchess has a hand in this; but who it should be
that dares undertake this black deed, I cannot guess; the Duke being
dangerously sick is the cause that makes them thus sudden in their mischief


There is no dispute now; haste, and provide those habits I use to make the
Round in; we will away this night, as she desires, only you and I; Oh Richardo,
thou art yet a stranger to that excellent Maid, whose faith is sent by heaven
to guard us from those wounds that her Mother threatens this State with


Pray, Sir, let Phillipine stay here, as if he expected your Highness answer to
his Letters, 'twill keep them at a Bay still, and make them uncertain what to
resolve; and if any of your own family be their spy or traitor, his stay will
deceive them


And early to morrow I will take my time to follow your Highness.


What were those that robbed you? are they at the Ferry still?


I believe not, Sir, they seem to be poor Rogues, some straggling Soldiers of
the next Garrison


Come, Richardo, let us away.


Sure I have lost my way; it is late, I will knock at this Hermits Cell, and
inform my self.


A friend; pr^y, which is the way to the Ferry?


Pray, come in, and afford your Charity; and then I will guide you to the Ferry.


What Impious villains were those that could so rudely bind those holy hands?


Speak softly, Son, they were Thieves, that have all this day robbed at the
Ferry; pray, come in, and let me shut the door, lest they espy us; it is late,
and they cannot stay long, the people are already alarmed


But that I have other vows to pay, I would know who they are that thus boldly
justify their villainy


For heavens sake, think not of going out, Son, it is late and dangerous.


It Is late, and, I confess, I am hungry and weary.


Within I have some of yesterdays Charity left still, which I shall freely give
you; Come, Son, and put off those weeds, and rest upon my poor bed, it knows no
care of earthly things; and if you bring no troubles in your mind, you will
find none there; I will watch, and call you early if the danger be removed; I
am stiff with lying all day upon one side


Let me help you in; Villains, to use an old Religious man thus!


It Is late; the Sun is upon the hill already, we shall scarce reach Millain to
night


We must ride the faster, Sir; But once over the Ferry, the way is short.


Call the Ferry-man.


The Boat is upon this side, I saw it from the hill.


It Is he, I know his voice, as soon as the Boat is upon the other shore, draw
upon him, and speed him any way


See, here is the Ferry-man. Honest friend, is the Boat on this side?


Yes, Sir.


What hour is it?


Late, Sir; does not the Prince pass? we looked for him to day.


Not till to morrow.


Our boughs will be withered by that time.


Ha! what noise is that? sure those villains have set upon some passengers.


How now Father, what noise is that?


'Twas the noise of swords, good Son, come in; those Banditoes I told you of, I
fear they are now robbing some body; For heavens sake, come in, and let them
not see you


Heaven forbid it should ever be said, I stood and listened to the danger that
threatens innocence, and hid my self for fear


Hark, they come; and they are so many you can but lose your self in that
attempt, and bring no safety to them


Who knows, since they are able to dispute it, but that my aid may save them?


See, it is they.


No matter, -- Hold, villains, what do you mean?


Upon them, kill them both.


I am lost for ever; Hold your hand, till I tell you a story may save you from
the malice of others, since heaven has preserved you thus miraculously against
my designs


Speak quickly. -- Sir, I hope your charity has found no


No, Sir, they are but scratches; pray, let us know what he would say.


First, let me see my friend dressed that lies bleeding here,


The Hermit is famous for his skill, and fortunate in what he undertakes; and
see where he comes


How fares my Son? is there any use of my skill, or is all desperate?


No, Father, heaven has been kind; and we must implore your aid, for their
mischief is fallen upon their own heads; this is he on whom you must practice
your skill and charity


Help me to bear him to my Cell, and then return. --


Defer not to hear what I would say, it concerns your safety; and I shall
discover a treachery your honest heart will scarce give credit to


What made thee attempt my life? thou see I am poor, no hope of gain cold
tempt thee


Hide not your self, Prince Sforza, from him that knows you, and the cause why
you are thus disguised


Ha! Prince Sforza?


Suppose I am Sforza, how came you by this knowledge?


From Phillipine, whom we pretended this day to rob; and in his Pocket found
the Princess Fidelia's Letter, which gave you notice that your life was laid
for; and this is one of those designs which heaven has prevented: In short (for
I find I am going to my grave) your life, Sir, is sold to me and others; Julia
and false Martino sold it; and Fidelia should have been my reward, for killing
you


Ye powers, what do I hear? -- Sir, does he speak truth, in part, are you
Prince Sforza


From you I will not hide my self; for since you durst protect me, as a private
man; I am confident, you will not quit me when you know I am your Prince


To confirm you in the belief of what I say, turn this way, and look upon this
Face. -- Baptista pulls off his disguise, of a Beard and Perriwig


Baptista?


O heavens! it is he.


Yes, Baptista, whom you so many ways have ruined: -- All which I could have
forgot, all but my loss in the hopes of my divine Fidelia


Knew she of this Plot?


She know of it? No, nor could any but a fool or a devil ask that question;
would I had fought with thee, thou could never have overcome me that art
master of so base a doubt


Was Prince Cosmo at Court when you came thence, has he any knowledge of this
design


No, upon my soul, they are a pair of matchless virtues.


Then I am happy; for I confess, I could not but with pain of mind think Prince
Cosmo less then I esteemed him. It Is a gallant and a faithful Prince; and when
you know him you will admire him; there is nothing in him an enemy can accuse,
or a friend wish a way, unless his choler may sometimes prevail: But that laid
aside, he is Brother to Fidelia, which is all that can besaid of excellent


I know the Prince, and was a Soldier under him; and I am glad to hear your
Highness has this opinion of him; for we had a rumor in the Army, that your
Highness wrought him out of his Command; believe me, Sir, he left the Camp, as
we were told, upon it, highly unsatisfied with your Highness about it


The Prince, when he shall know the better, will not be persuaded I could be
guilty of so low or meama crime; and when I believe him not fit for such a
charge or trust, I shall not fear to tell him so; for I yet never flattered a
friend, nor injured my enemy; why then should I be so unreasonable as to wrong
Prince Cosmo? yet their malice had like to have been prosperous in their design
of breaking our friendship; for till this minute I suspected the Prince had (by
his Mothers interest) procured my being called from my Government, here in
Pavia; but I have now found their design; and their malice has but given a
growth to that friendship they meant to have withered, -- How do you, Sir


Not well, I find I have lost more blood then I can spare.


Father, pray lend us your help here. --


I would fain know upon what ground this Baptista accused Count Martino and the
Duchess


Read that Letter, and 'twill satisfy your doubts.


It Is Martino's hand.


It Is so, and Carlo brought it this Evening.


Heaven! thy hand is visible. Read, Sir, for I dare trust you with the secret
of my Life; What course shall I take to prevent their malice


Haste, Sir, to Court, before the Fame of this attempt come to their knowledge,
show this Letter to your Father, and seize Martino; But spare to name Julia,
'twill break the Prince's and Fidelia's Heart; for whose sake, if you love her,
and her Noble Brother, you will hide her part of this fault: And Martino once
removed, 'twill be easy to reclaim her Heart; for it is his ambitious Mind has
wrought her easy Nature to this bloody design. Oh! I faint, and yet ere I die,
as you have Charity, forgive Baptista; Then live and love at the rate I have
adored the excellent Fidelia, and you will then deserve her Heart; Fidelia is
all Angel, and Baptista too earthly to think so. -- Oh Father, your Charity,
pray; that I may confess a sad Soul to you, and end better then I lived


Can you read that Letter?


Yes, Sir; but it is so sad a scene it makes my blood run backwards in my
veins; lose no time, Sir, your Life is at stake; I will but dress these
slight wounds and follow you


I will leave a Horse for you.


Pray, Sir, quit not your disguise; it is better then a guard till you know whom
you may trust


You have reason, and 'twas my own design. Farewell, Sir; at my Lodging I will
expect you


That Villain, Martino, has ruined all our Family; but I will find him when his
thoughts expects no such visit: I will in, and discover my self to Baptista,
and make him write a Letter to my Mother and Martino, wherein he shall only
mention the Prince is escaped, and conceal his own Condition; He shall write to
them that they should trust me with any design, as one he knows faithful and
fit for their purpose. This recommendation will admit me to their Counsels; he
shall tell them too, that he has seized me according to their Order, and that I
shall be private and safe in his custody till their Order require me; 'twill
keep off the suspicion of who I am, or fear of my coming till they send for me.
Thus I am resolved to return to Millain, in this Periwigg and a Pilgrims Weed;
and if that disguise can conceal me, I am resolved to undertake all their
designs; by which means I may prevent their malice; But when the plot is ripe,
if then I fall not with a sad Fate upon the wretch, till this fiery prompter
has called to his despairing thoughts all those bloody designs his barbarous
Soul has plotted, and with fatal wounds laid the Traitor at my feet a sacrifice
to our injured Family, Heaven curse me strangely. But for thee, O Julia, my
unfortunate Mother, though I will not lift a hand against thee; yet I have
words in store that shall wound thee deeper then a sword


O Cosmo, Cosmo, cruel Brother! why have thou robbed me of the Joy I had in
thee? He has broke his Faith, Madam, and is gone to be calmely wicked upon
second thoughts, in cold blood: cruel! What will thou do, unworthy youth? Good
Gods, would I have given Faith to him that should have told me Cosmo would have
dissembled with Fidelia, and wept to a Sister when blood and revenge were in
his Heart; water in his Eyes, and Murder in his Mind


Do not say so.


Do not defend him, Madam; he is not worth your Anger nor Pity, that could lie
to you, you that he loved: And he that dares look his Mistress in the face, and
tell a lie, neither Religion, Honor nor Virtue, can have any ties upon him


For my sake, do not revile him; he has some new reason, (I know he has) else I
am certain he would have stayed; for his Heart is full of Truth and Honor, and
blessed with all that is glorious in a Man; and though his Rage, sometimes, like
a storm throws those Virtues into disorder, yet when he is collected, his calm
Mind is all divine


This Opinion makes me hate him, that he can be so faulty to you that are thus
noble. Pray hate him, pray do, that I may learn to do it by your example; For
Heaven knows, it is hard for me to leave loving him, though I chide till the
day sets, for Cosmo is next to Sforza in my Heart. But this falsehood has
staggered all my hopes, for his Love was that I built upon; The Ambitious,
Jealous, Angry, nay, the Lustful Man can Love, but the false dissembler can
never be just to himself or others; and till I found him so, my patience bore
the present miseries; my Heart still hoping Cosmo's Virtue would one day redeem
our Family


So he will, my Soul prophesies he will. But oh, the War I have within me, when
I think my Brother and Cosmo are Enemies! Should they meet, 'twould kill
Victoria ere she can resolve who should be victor


Unhappy Cosmol what would I have given to have saved thee Innocent, that it
might not have been said, thy passion betrayed such a sweetness, whose Love is
so far from being Angry, that she chides my Justice


Pray be not thus passionate; when there is reason, I can be as angry as you.


Had you chid him I would not; and if you would have me defend him, let me see
you angry; that may awaken the Sister in me, whose partial Mind may plead
something for him; but now it is impossible while you are kind; had he been one
that the world knew not, had he never given assurance of what he durst do; that
bubble-vanity, and men's idol, honor, might have pleaded his excuse; but for
him that has to sundry battles given a name, and won in War a glorious Fame,
on whom the Sun yet never set ungloriously, for him to break his Faith and
Friendship to quarrel with his Friend? That Friend that gave him his greatest
Honor, by having once been his Enemy. Who but a vain Man would aspire higher
in Honor and Arms, then to have been, first, Enemy, then Friend to Sforza;
and after all, not unwelcome to the divine Victoria


Nay, then I conjure you by what is dearest to you, leave this discourse; and
unless you despise the secrets we so late blushed for, you will cease to revile
him


Madam, there is a Soldier without who desires to speak with you, his business
speaks haste


Admit him, my Heart fore-tells some sad accident.


My business is with the Princess Fidelia, yet your Highness may partake of it;
but I shall beg some place more private to deliver it in, for it is of
consequence


In my Chamber, if you please, Madam, we may be private; follow us, Friend.


Heaven avert what my fears would prompt me to believe.


I Must be gone, my business calls me hence; but to your care, Father, I must
leave my Friend; you must be private in what has past to day; you know what
persons are concerned, Farewell. Your blessing, and be pleased to take this
Charity to adorn your Altar


I am counseled, Heaven bless the Prince, and guide my Son; My prayers shall
wait upon you; and when your Friend is able to travel, he shall come to Court;
In the mean time, I will carry him to the Ferry-mans house, who, in return of
your bounty to them, shall carefully attend him


Pray let the Count Baptista be privately buried; for though he be of a Noble
Family, it must not yet be known he is dead. -- I could have wished he had
lived; yet this Letter and this Ring will (I hope) be sufficient to compass my
designs.


WHat have I heard! My Mother accused of a Murder, and by Prince Sforza?
Heaven sure has changed its course, he would not else have told me this.
Fidelia, be thy self, and let not thy fond Affection tame thy Soul so, as to
sit calmely down and bear this Injury


'Twas my fear, Madam, that this truth would grieve your Heart; and had my Life
been only at stake, I should have died in silence: But when yours, my Fathers,
and all our Families are thrown into the scale, Piety and Honor bid me warn
the Innocent, that they may fly the slaughter; while a wilful silence might
make me not only lament the misery, but guilty of that crime too. Yet, witness
Heaven, it is a secret to all the world besides; And you can witness, when her
Malice was most active and most prosperous, that she was Fidelia's Mother was
all satisfaction; for whose sake I have still had a Patience as great as her
Injuries


Thinks Prince Sforza I will justify her follies? why else does he stab me
with a repetition of them? Does your Highness think to heal my wounded Mind by
telling me you have forgiven my Mother? Does that take away her faults? No, but
shows her guilt, and his vanity greater, and urged but to upbraid me, and
civilly tell me how much better he deserves then I. Yet, if I had not been
mistaken, you would not have forgot, that I, to keep a spotless Friendship with
Prince Sforza, have erred even against Nature, abandoning a Mothers and a
Brothers Interest, in quitting all the world to justify the value I had of him
above it; and had he loved Fidelia with half that kindness, he would have hid
this fault from me, as if it had been his own Crime; But all the world (Prince
Sforza too) joins to make Fidelia miserable


O ye Gods, then I am miserable. Come, Martino, I will now call thee Friend, if
thou will finish what Baptista but begun, since my Friend can thus mistake her
servant


Gentle, Sister, why this passion? what is there more in his words then you
your self have feared? had you rather we should all perish, then hear your
danger from a Friend? Had a third person told you, would not you have broke the
glass that brought you poison? Good Heaven, I, without blushing, dare profess
my self a Lover too, yet will not assume such a partial Dominion over his mind,
as to prohibit him speaking what is just and honest; and if it be a truth, what
he has said, methinks you are much to blame


If it be not, By all my hopes, I vow my self a Widowed Virgin, in some
Holy-house, and bid farewell to Sforza and his Friendship, that could thus
rashly accuse my Mother; and if it be a truth, I am then unworthy of his
thought or Love


Why are you silent, Sir; Why do you not acquit your self?


Treason, war, or sickness, bring no wounds but I can bear; But the wounds of a
friends unkindness strike the soul, it grows dumb, and the heart pale. But I
have finished. Believe her Innocent, Madam; so that Error wounds none but me,
you shall never find me busy to prevent a danger; nor had I spoke now, but for
your sake, and to preserve the Princess Fidelia. Read that Letter. -- Nay, then
I have lived too long; That frown this Evening Baptista, and malice had been
prosperous, O for those wounds I gave him; those would have cured this misery;
for when Fidelia frowns, why should Sforza live? but I talk, and prevent what
these would do -- Bleed, and weep, Fidelia's lost


Sforza, brother, hold; for Heavens sake, hold; Fidelia bids you hold, Sforza;
O stay, what misery do you fly to? your friend calls, and bids you stay


You wrong me, Madam; Those that can and will go, I scorn to hold.


But those that obey you ought not to tread upon; why did you refuse to read
the Letter, which might have quitted him


Because I have miseries enough, and will not hunt that knowledge which will
but distract my mind. I am now ready for my Grave, and will not go a step out
of my way to avoid it, but here stand and well-come fate; for since I have
lived to see Prince Sforza angry with me, for a word, when passion and misery
had distracted me, why should I desire to live? it is folly, it is madness, since
I cannot hope a remedy for my sick mind; when he, who forgave his Enemies a
murder would not forgive Fidelia a passionate word? O Madam, this Cruelty in
your brother makes me invite malice and Murder. Come, both Baptista and
Martino, come, come all that hate Fidelia, and see your selves revenged upon
her, and behold her withered by her friend, see all she gloried in; Her
friendship, and her Faith in Sforza, like early blossoms, by untimely storms,
struck and blasted; but why do I hold this Infection -- Fidelia's death; and
lest nature should grow weak, and tempt me to save my self, thus to the fire I
offer all my means of safety


Their passions must have way; It Is time, not Reason must prevail; Love, whose
glory is built upon our misery, and our griefs his Triumph still, and our fears
his food! Tyrant! whom none serves but slaves; Force, not affection, fills thy
Train; who cares not to have his Servants splendid or great; The Pale, Lean,
and desperate fill thy Court, which makes me fear, Reason, nor the gods come
not there; But this is no time to dispute thy power. I will read this dangerous
Letter

Baptista. KNow, the Duke was this day dangerous sick of his Imposthume, and he
is yet without hopes of life; Sforza has notice of our design; and if you
strike not in time, all our hopes are desperate; if he outlive this day, and
the Duke die, your hopes in Fidelia are lost; for we are certain, she and the
prince hold Intelligence; The Duchess salutes you; Cosmo is past in a
Disguise, to fight with Sforsa; if you meet him secure him, till you hear from
us; for the Duchess will not venture him in such a Danger as a Duel against
the Prince; upon whose success all our designs and Hopes depend. Farewell, and
burn this Letter: C. is the Messenger, to whom you may impart how business
stands

Yours, Martino.


The other name is blotted out, O heavens! what a plot was here, to ruin all
our hopes? This Letter I will show my Father, whose recovery is miraculous;
Heaven sure has lent him some few days, to preserve his name and family; which
if he had died must, in this mischief, have shrunk to nothing; sure, when he
shall see this paper he will cease to give faith to cursed Martino


This is his Chamber: Thus disguised he cannot know me, or if he do, nothing
shall save him; nor is there such a thing as danger, when men are resolved to
die, or Execute; Oh Fidelia, thus I will revenge thee on Sforza, and preserve
thee against Martino, I must not think of her, she puts womanish thoughts in my
mind, I will knock


Who is there?


One in haste that should speak with the Count Martino.


How now? your news.


Pray, my Lord, retire to some private place; I have something to say from
Baptista


Thou art wounded, is the party dead?


Yes, my Lord; but we had a hard bout on it.


Speak softly, and follow me.


WHere is the Duke?


He sleeps, Madam.


I must awake him.


By no means, if you love his health.


I must, His own, and the health of Millain depends upon my news; Sir, Father,
Sir


Who calls?


It Is I, Sir? your Victoria.


Rise my dear Child, thou were with me in my dream too.


Oh, Sir!


Why weep'st thou?


Read that paper, Sir, and save your Son, and speedily, or all our hopes are
lost; for Murder and Treason, if not prevented, will sweep your Family from
the Earth, and Millain no more obey the name of Sforza


Heaven forbid the Execution of this wicked Design.


It Is not the heavens, Sir, must do it; their part is here in the discourse;
you must act now, as their Minister here where Justice and Nature call for your
Defense; and if you do not suddenly Seize Martino, who thus long has abused
your trust, you will see this last Seen of your life set in the blood of your
self, and family


It Is so horrid it scarce finds my faith.


If your goodness defer preventing this mischief till the guilt be visible,
here, in few hours, you will see your Son, and my dear Brother, bleeding his
own Testimony; and then your Justice can only punish, and not prevent the
Traitor


Good Heaven, it is certain; This is his hand, I know the Character; and her
modest and Innocent nature confirms it; She durst not else thus confidently,
without pregnant proofs, accuse him: Who is there? Carlo, command a guard to
attend my daughter; Go, Victoria, and seize the body of the Count; If he
resist, force him hither, if he yield, be civil; Carlo, where is Julia


Wher'ever she be, she dares not appear in this cause.


Carlo, tell the Duchess I would speak with her.


I shall, Sir; -- There is wonder and mystery in this discovery; how the Devil
came she by that Letter? It Is the same I gave Baptista; This day will be full
of mischief; something bold and sudden, or all is lost; I will to the Duchess
with this News; The difficulty will be, how to save Martino, they have his hand
to witness against him


By your favor, Sir; I would gladly speak with the Duchess.


Some begging Pilgrim; I am in haste friend.


If not with her, Sir, the Count Martino, or Seigniour Carlo.


What is your business with him?


From a friend; and of importance.


I am the man, Sir?


Then you know this hand?


Yes, it is the Count Baptista's.


It Is so, and he salutes you.


What news!


This Letter will speak.


Stay here, till I call the Duchess.


She is guilty; Lust and Murder have stayn'd her soul; Martino and this Villain
have betrayed her


Escaped? Is Sforza escaped? Where is the Soldier that said he was dead? and
my letter in the Dukes hand


Yes, Madam; and the Princess Victoria is gone with a guard, to seize the Count
Martino, with order to bring him, alive, or dead


That is good news.


This Pilgrim will give you a more Exact Account.


I am full of distraction. Come you from Baptista, friend?


What says my Letter, Madam!


Oh, Carlo, we are lost; there is no safety for us, nor hopes of any, since
Sforza is escaped; This is Fidelia's Act, 'twas she betrayed us; but I Will be
revenged on her ere I die; where is the poison I prepared? this night shall her
be last


O horrid wickedness.


It Is no time, Madam, to think of such poor Revenge; Let us provide for our own
safety


Villain, thou shall fall with the earliest, or I will miss of my Aim.


What says Baptista's Letter?


Cosmo is his Prisoner; and he will detain him, tell we dismiss him.


Something may be built upon that yet.


Baptista himself sore wounded, Sforsa escaped, and I must live to see my Cosmo
stoop to him, and be a subject to the Branch of that Cedar, which my frowns
have shaken, and my dear Martino too, is lost for ever


What said she? her dear Martino; O, that I had been born deaf, rather then
have heard that fatal sound


Madam, dare you trust me in this danger, when all is desperate; no matter who
guides the Helm, if you will consent; I can from this Letter propose something
like safety, but 'twill look desperate; this Pilgrim too must join, under which
habit, Baptista says, you will find a Soldier stout and faithful; Cosmo is in
prison, this is the ground I will build on; haste presently to the Duke, fall
on your knees before him, pretend your Son Cosmo is murdered; let this Pilgrim
second you, and affirm he saw him dead; and, friend, you shall urge you
received those wounds in his defense; be but faithful, and bold in this
desperate occasion, and thou shall find a reward beyond thy hopes, or thy
wishes; and when he has confirmed it, then call for revenge and justice against
the Count Martino, for the murder of your Son; say that he is fallen by his
plot; and that you know Prince Sforza is marked for slaughter too; seem to know
nothing of his escape, or any thing that is past concerning the Princess
Victoria's complaint, nor hear what they would say, to inform you; but put on
all your craft, and plead with passion; no matter how unreasonable, nor how
excessive it appears; the more violent, the more Mother; the more unnatural
your griefs appear, your sorrows will be the more taking and infectious; and
seem to be distracted with the loss, call for justice, call for present and
exemplary justice upon that traitor, Count Martino, traitor to the Gods, and
his friends


Hold, villain, leave to spit thy venom and thy malice; is this thy gratitude
to him that raised thee? and can thy narrow soul hope I should be brought to
betray my Martino


Come, Madam, you must lay by this womanish humor; it is no time to express a
fondness when Crowns and Lives are at stake; if you will save him you must take
my counsel; If you now appear his friend, it is his certain ruin, and your own;
to defend him will blot all your credit with the Duke, for the Count is forfeit
in his opinion, beyond redemption; and will be lost before you can speak for
him


Let all perish, ere I have a hand in the ruin of my friend.


Hell of this foolish Love; that blind Boy misleads us more then Fortune or
Ambition; is it better to have it said, you loved, or saved Martino? Be ruled,
and I will save him, at least defer the mischief: thus we may redeem him from
this certain ruin which threatens him, by discovery of that Letter; and by
this means you may clear all doubts (which are not a few) that you had a share
in this plot; and by this way you will move their pity, and turn their hate and
fears into love of Julia; and thence will grow your power and our safety; in
which cloud of tears and sadness Martino vanishes; for being once a prisoner in
the Citadel, which I command, we can through a private way release him when we
have resolved together what to do; and while they are secure in their minds,
believing him a prisoner, we can with the less suspicion pursue our first
designs; for Sforza once dead, we shall quickly find life in our plot again.
Friend, your Letter admits you to this trust, and you must again join in the
business; and if you prove faithful you will find a grateful Patron


When you have tried me, Sir, speak as you find.


Be private, and ready till occasion calls; and Carlo, see him rewarded for his
former service: O Carlo, you must excuse my passion, for being unwilling to
accuse my friend; but now I confess, it is reason that you urged, and the rest
we will leave to Fortune


Pray, lose no time; he is by this a prisoner.


This Lemon in mine eye, that I may weep, and down with my hair; so: now
Fortune if ever thou were kind to Lovers, assist in this my last great action,
that I may revenge and save a friend


Go, and be prosperous; let Julia's fortune still attend you, whose tears have
still been more powerful then the sword; away Soldier, follow, and observe
your -- Q


To your grief, I shall; O heaven! what have I seen and heard?


SEnd in that Soldier, then haste and find Carlo, tell him I have business of
consequence with him; this news has given some life to our design; The Duke
desperately sick, and Sforza living, had been a black day to Martino. Now the
Duke recovers, and Sforza's death will Crown the work; -- Oh, you are welcome;
so, shut the door, and tell me, how died Sforza, and how Baptasta


At the Ferry, Sir, we set upon him, where it cost us many a wound; for he had
notice of our design


For thy wounds, thou shall not repent them; where is the Present thou spokest
of, from Baptista


Here villain, do you know this face? do you stare? is it


Nay, then Fortune is a Whore still; but, for thy sword it brings no terror;
nor did I set Baptista on, because I doubted I could not kill thee my self; but
to have it done, and the world not know how


I am in haste; this is not all the work I have to do; -- So


And you are mortal too, or that blood lies.


Then I am lost; Martino and all his hopes are withered; it is late, I find my
shadow grows long, and night comes on apace


How do you, Sir?


Too well, Ferdinando.


Call a Surgeon quickly; Dear Sforza, retire to your Chamber.


O dear Victoria, there is no end of Sforza's miseries; Heaven wars against
him, and Fidelia frowns


Why do you say so? alas, she weeps, and will know no comfort, since Sforza is
angry for a word when grief and passion had almost distracted her; pray, go to
your Chamber


To my grave, Victoria; death is welcomer far then this life; till Fidelia
smiles my heart can know no peace


I would our fortunes knew no other difficulties; how easy and how certain
would our joys be then


ANd did he hurt the Prince?


Yes, Sir, and they are both wounded.


Generous and noble Sforza; well, we must lose no time; Antonio away; remember
my directions, get those Soldiers in readiness, and stay about the Princesses
Chamber; you know my call, when you hear my whistle, be ready; this night must
finish all our miseries: and Cosmo's love the innocent shall save, or missing
find a grave


SEE here, behold the Monster; ask these Lords if we did not surprise him in
the act? executing his Treason upon my Brother, who now lies bleeding of those
wounds this Traitor this minute gave him


Villain, what moved thee to this bloody purpose?


Will you hear me with patience, Sir; if I be not innocent punish me; be
pleased to produce the Soldier, which now is Prince Sforza; by what reason
urged, I know not, unless it be envy of your favor; who this morning, in
disguise, pretended business, and being alone drew upon me; nature and honor
bad me defend my self, these wounds he gave me, and some I gave him; and when
he could not himself destroy me, then he cries out, it is Sforza the Prince; at
which, Heaven (that only saw the action) witnesses how it struck my heart, till
fear and amazement disarmed me, and at his feet I threw my self; in which
posture his party found me; Come, Madam, it is neither honor nor virtue in your
soft sex, to design or pursue this bloody purpose


Where is the Duke?


What means this distraction?


O, Sir, if ever Julia were dear to Alphonso, now let her find his justice in
all its horror fall in execution upon that bloody monster: O, let sad fates
close those eyes that have smiled upon the blood and ruin of my child


What means this? sure she has not heard Sforza is escaped.


Some new plot, I know; it is a subtle devil.


My Son Cosmo, all my joy, my deat Cosmo!


What of him?


He is dead, he is dead, fallen by murder.


Dead!


Oh! dead; and by that cursed monster, Martino; Hell upon thy black soul for
it; O, Sir, let not the Traitor live to repent it; why should he find such
charity that showed no mercy to my Son? the ungrateful villain gave my dear
Cosmo no warning of his grave which Martino dug; but sent him in haste to
answer all his sins: Oh, let me see the villain struck into the earth with as
little mercy as he showed his Prince; and if not suddenly prevented, Prince
Sforza will meet the same fate; for the villain has writ his name too in the
black book of death


O strange daring! Heaven, do thou see and suffer this?


Cosmo dead? Oh heaven! --


There is more in this fury of hers then any man yet can judge of, unless all
women-kind are damned


O, Sir, I beg you will let them hale the villain to a Dungeon.


Where heard you this sad news?


By this Pilgrim, who past by chance, and took Cosmo's part, in which he
received these wounds


Away to the Castle with the villain; come hither, friend; saw you Prince Cosmo
fall


I saw him they call Baptista fall; and he confessed a young man that was then
wounded, and now they say is dead, was Prince Cosmo; and he then affirmed, in
my hearing, a Hermit being by, who lives at the Ferry, that there came order
from Count Martino to kill Prince Sforza too


Villain, does not thy soul grow pale at this?


It Is not all your plots or malice shall make me quit my own innocence; and
when you have murdered me by a formal process, let Alphonso look to his own
life, he will find Martino was his guard; for me, I scorn to beg my life till
it be forfeited; and when ever Martino dies, you shall see him do it with less
fear then those live with that struck him


Hale that bloody dog hence. --


O Antonio, the Princess Victoria's tears had so much kindness in them; the
Balsam has cured all my wounds, and this storm once over, I shall be the
happiest of men; away, remember my directions


I confess, Sir, such a silence as the Princess showed when she heard you were
dead, speaks love more then all that whining passion Poets would express


Dear Antonio, I cannot be so cruel as to let her heart be afflicted when
kindness to Cosmo wounds it; and therefore find her and Fidelia, and assure
them that I live; but conjure them to secrecy, and tell them my life depends
upon the thought that I am dead


I shall obey you.


Soldier, come away; the Duchess stays to speak with you. -- This you must
wear, it is the earnest of her bounty.


It Is an honor, Sir.


UPon my life and honor, Madam, he lives; but this secret must not pass your
breast, for some few days, if you love his life


O, Madam, what a change is here? Antonio was ever honest, and his friend; and
my heart in despite of all that grief and fear which then possessed it, believes
and hopes in Cosmo


My love to both of you divides my mind; I fear for Cosmo, and hope for
Victoria, yet Antonio's word must not be doubted; dear Antonio, once again
speak the truth; do not fear, because we are women, to tell the worst of Fates;
for know, to deceive us, is twice to wound thy friends


Madam, it has not been Antonio's practice, nor his trade to lie; and again, if
Cosmo be not living some strange curse strike me; more I must not say, not can
I longer stay, my business calls me hence; which, with your Highness pardon, I
must obey


Since has changed this Scene, gentle Fidelia, let me beg you will make it a
perfect Jubilee; and since your Brother lives, why should mine dye? you saw I
mourned yours, and will Fidelia kill mine? remember what he has been, and let
not one mistake blot all his story


No more, Madam; you shall find my Heart both kind and just to Sforza, though
he were harsh to me; you have not seen him since he was hurt


No, but I shall now go find him out; and if you will go with me, be certain of
a welcome


I shall not refuse to go, where Victoria and Honor lead.


THis Surgeon has a sovereign remedy to stop blood, 'twas his hand saved the
Life of Ferdinando, when the rest gave him lost; and I doubt not but 'twill
have a good effect upon your Highness


Come, we must away; my Father stays, he has called a Council at his Chamber
concerning Martino; The Villain shall now pay for all his Treachery; tell
Victoria she must be there; bid Richardo and Ferdinando make haste, and let us
meet there


WEighing the sad cause of this Assembly, the Persons too concerned so near in
blood and trust; I shall not need to urge you to a serious Consideration, how
we may secure our Peace and Person, punishing the past crimes by taking a just
Revenge on the Murderer of my ever dear Cosmo


I owe the world and your Highness many debts, but none that has greater ties
upon me then this your kindness; which has still esteemed and used my Cosmo as
your Son, whose loss now comes so near my Soul; I cannot mourn his Murder, nor
rest in peace, till I know what your Justice will decree for my Revenge. Nor
should I appear thus undecently without a mourning garment, but that I hope, my
impatiency will find a kind interpretation from these impartial Judges; Amongst
whom, though Cosmo was born an Enemy, yet such was his Nature, that I dare say
he has not left one behind him, but that ungrateful, ambitious, and
treacherous Martino, whose Malice though it only struck my Cosmo, yet it
appears by his Letters 'twas levelled at the root of the Family, my ever
Honored, and your dear Sforza; who, though he found the Gods more kind then
Cosmo, yet I will not doubt his voice to the Revenge of my Son; though some
malicious people would have me believe (what my Heart abhors) that Sforza hated
Cosmo. But I have done, because my Interest in this cause might be thought to
sway me against the Justice of what may be pleaded in the defense of this
villain; I will now be silent, and leave the Gods and this Assembly to decree
their pleasures, in mine and my Sons Revenge


Though I might urge his sword drawn upon me, when he knew me to be his Prince,
and produce these wounds, yet I scorn to name them; and shall only desire that
Letter I sent your Cosmo. But Heaven (juster then he hoped) sent that poor
Pilgrim, whose honest Heart engaged him by chance, by which means, he is fallen
in his own practice; And though I will not pursue him upon my own Interest, yet
as a Traitor, and Murderer of my Brother, I think speedy Justice ought to
offer his blood a sacrifice to Cosmo


And to me there is nothing more visible then his guilt, nor any thing so easy
as to give sentence upon him; and he has my voice to die some lingering infamous
death, to expiate the ingratitude


I am not satisfied with this name that is blotted out, it is some one that
ought not to be concealed, I hate Treason both in the Root and Branch; no
honest Man ought to have mercy on any that wishes it well; and I not only
consent to this present sentence upon Count Martino, but to all that had a hand
in it; that they may share in the punishment as well as in the guilt, without
exception of persons


He that can be ungrateful will upon occasion be all that is ill; To avoid
which opinion, I shall now endeavor to justify my self Loyal to my Prince,
just to those Laws that must preserve this State, and yet not forget to be
grateful to my Friend. The many Obligations I owe to the Count Martino are
well known both to your Highness and this Assembly. And that, I hope, will
excuse me, notwithstanding the past vote, if I shall (as far as Honor and
Justice shall authorize me) in this Assembly, defend the Honor of my Patron.
First, I would gladly see a legal Conviction of the Count; let the Crime
appear, and then the Judgment; Let the dead body of Prince Cosmo be produced,
upon which all this business depends: For who knows he is killed? who saw the
Body? There appears to me only a report made by her Highness, who received the
relation from a Pilgrim. It Is granted, her condition and authority ought to
find faith and pity. Yet when Life and Honor are at stake, Justice cannot
appear too circumspect; And though I will not deny he is dead, yet I will hope
he lives, till I see some proof more visible; here is only a passenger reports
it; her Highness (like a kind Mother) believes her fears; and I, like the
faithful Servant of the unfortunate Count, will hope it is but her fears. And
notwithstanding Count Ferdinando's Passion, I shall believe this Action in me
has much more Humanity then his sentence; I am sure, it is Charity, at least, to
wish all men innocent; I know, Sir, the Count has many Enemies; your Highness
trust and favor has made him fit for Malice; and who knows but this is an
Arrow of her shooting? Nay, I know he has been threatened, and when there is
occasion will produce to whom. But to the business; here is a Letter produced,
and they say the Counts hand is to it, and another that subscribed put out: why
may not those that put out one name, put in another? Baptista is the Counts
Accuser, you all know he was his Enemy, and I know he had reason to be so; yet
'twas your Highness service that gave him that reason: For the Count being
certain he had ambitious designs, not fit for a Subject to arrive at, (rather
then disgust him, by telling him he was not worthy of what he aimed at) in
Policy, to keep the State quiet, kept him banished. Never smile, my Lord, for
this is truth, though the Camp knew it not; And Prince Sforza knows, Fidelia
was their quarrel; for whom the Count Baptista has always born an ambitious
Passion


You know so much, Carlo, and are so ingenious, I shall hope, you will confess
your knowledge of this Letter too


Your Highness has too much Honor, to fear to speak what ever you know; and if
Carlo be guilty, pray, Sir, accuse him; Fidelia is too much concerned.


There will be a time when that may be fit too.


Till then, Sir, confident of the Justice before whom we plead, and
strengthened by my own Innocence, I am still desirous there may be some
testimony produced against the Count: God forbid Accusations should make Men
guilty; if that were so, few were safe that Princes call to their Councils or
their trusts


To the point, Sir; what can you say, why this Traitor should not die a public
example, to give a terror and warning to others


When you, that have twice called him Traitor, can once prove him so, then let
him die


The proofs are evident; here is a gallant Prince murdered, and another sold
to slaughter; here is his hand to the bloody contract


If your Highness thinks me fit to speak, if there be reason in what I have
said, I shall proceed; if not, I have done


Monster, with what impudence have thou thus long dared to tempt the patience
of thy Prince; And thus, in the Ears and Eyes of his Mother and his friends,
excused the Murderer? Clear thy self from being one in the plot, thou Idolater
of that Monster; Martino, or both of you shall find a hangman to attend your
funerals. Traitors! thus to forget the kindness which I have showed you! Is
this the return your bloody minds have made me, for keeping up your Interest
with this generous prince? O Sir, let me now beg your Justice may make them as
public Examples of your Justice as they once stood of your favor


Be patient, Give him leave to speak; Reason and Justice dwell near together;
and when they either call, or point, you shall find I both hear and see.
Proceed, Carlo


If 'twere for a private obscure person, Sir, one fled from the Law or Justice;
If 'twere for a stranger I pleaded, I should not wonder at this immoderate
haste, and impatience to do Justice, or if I were now to inform this Assembly
who the Count Martino is; There might be something said against the
impertinency of such a discourse; But when I only desire to know why, ere I
consent to the death or dishonor of my Patron, one that two hours since all
men honored, one that this morning was trusted and reverenced by all, having
had the faith of two Princes, and power of two Principalities reposed in him;
Why should it then seem strange, that I, his Creature, wish and believe him
Innocent, That has the Evidence of so many Ages, and so many Princes favors,
to plead for him? In whose name I only desire Justice; Prove his Crime,
produce his Treason; show the Body, proceed Legally, and if Carlo be not as
ready to pronounce his sentence, as any, then accuse me; But since no one here
saw the Prince dead, or wounded, Give me leave, again, to say I hope he is
living; and that hope is more kind to the prince, and has more Charity in it,
my Lord, then all that furious desire of Revenge which your malice shows; And
if you loved Prince Cosmo, or virtue, as you pretend, you had rather he were
living, and the Count Martino Innocent, then to have a prince murdered, that
your hate might then see your Enemy destroyed


Proceed, I shall answer anon, and make it appear, I scorned, and not envied
your Idol


The Count, my Lord, had honor and parts would rather deserve your envy, then
your scorn; And by that time you have Commanded as many Armies, and governed as
many Provinces, as he has done, with honor, I shall then Envy your Lordship;
prevail with your prince, and the world, to give you that esteem and trust he
had two hours ago; show the wounds you have received for your Country, produce
those Arguments, for a Prince to trust you; 'twill be nobler far, then to sit
and bark at one, in his Age, whose youth you bowed to; and you will find, my
Lord, the Count has virtue, even to bear this scandal; it is not the first
misery he has suffered, his fortune has been used to storms; and yet I dare say,
the unkindness of some friends (turned Enemies this day,) has made his
Imprisonment heavier then his first chains, at the loss of Pavia; Yet when
malice has done her worst, he has the word of two Princes, that he is honest;
which when your Lordship can produce, then you may laugh, as he and I do, at
the malice of the world, which still pursues the favorite till he is fit for
Pity


Did no body see his dead body; where is the Soldier that brought the news?


Let him be called, some one, that knows where he is, fetch him immediately;
none stir? who saw him? whence came the Report? are you all silent? all accuse,
and none know why


Sir, my Lord Ferdinando knows, sure; His violent and earnest calling for
Justice has some ground. My Lord, his Highness would see your Evidence


It Is visible enough in thy impudence; will your Highness be pleased to read
your Letter, and behold those wounds upon your own flesh; the rest was a Fame I
only met; here is the Traitors hand set to this blood, is that too little to
convince a Traitor? Good God? how black and partial is this Court grown; when a
few gilded words, (from a party in this mischief) should be able to divert
Justice from her Course? and my honest heart must humbly beg pardon, if I take
liberty at full to answer this Impudence in his Creature; The first part of my
wonder is, to find, even the best men are grown tame by Custom; slaved so by a
favorite, that their minds are scarce left free; Even their thoughts are led
in Chains, and either dare not, or will not see, blinded either by fear, or
Interest, through the mist his greatness throws before their eyes, else We
might have grown wise, by our Neighbors miseries, rather then have cherished a
Frozen Viper; And whereas he boasts of his dead Masters Trust, Ask the
deceased soul of Great Matthias, whether Martino be not a false and a bloody
Villain? Nay, ask this Assembly, whether he was not a Traitor to that Master?
And since I am urged, I must say, I know Martino sold the Battle of Pavia; And
he that would then sell his old Master, and his Country, will not stick to
betray the new one, when he finds a Chapman; But he has now no need of these
low Arts to rise by. Here he finds his way prepared, and, by easy steps now
gains his designs; Lust, Covetousness, and flattery, in others, make his way;
Who finding he grows powerful in your Highness mind, there rests only, darkly
to tell what he designs; And then let Signior Carlo, and his Emissaries, with
all Arts and Diligence, strive who should first understand or serve his will,
and procure that his ambitious desires may be offered ere he please to ask
them; Nay, to such a height of Impudence his faction is grown, that here, even
in the presence of your highness, where the Assembly is made up of the Royal
Blood; One of them, and That, our Prince, calling for Justice; for those wounds
which yet bleed in our Eyes, instead of punishing the Traitor, Behold, with
what impudence one of his Parasites dares defend him, urging his honors, and
his Trusts, so many Armies raised. Fool, those are so many Crimes only, so many
stains, so many why's he should be torn in pieces, being lost, or sold; I speak
my own knowledge, this is a secret of the camps, Sir, that holp to buy one of
them; since which my soul has abhorred the Traitors more for selling that
gallant Prince, then him he has murd'red now


aside, How came he by this knowledge?


Here we find the Count confesled Debtor to the State, even by his favorite;
and instead of paying it, he would have Credit, to Cozen his Prince again; you
confess, he has had his Evidence of both Crowns; show, where he has done his
duty; else you will find those Armies, those Provinces, those trusts you boast
of, (if ill discharged) stand so many Evidences against him; and he so far from
meriting the least grace or favor, for these, it is impudence to name them. And
I dare say, (in the days of liberty and freedom, ere his power awed this Table
so, That both Princes and Council stooped to the Frowns of a Favorite and a
Woman) Martino had died upon a Scaffold ere he had found a place above his
Fellows


Ferdinando, you are honest; But yet know the respect you owe this place; else
you will find I can be angry


Sir, I shall not dispute against your Highness; yet being called this day
where my Honor and Conscience are both at stake, I shall claim the liberty of
an honest man, that I may discharge my duty both to my Prince and Country.
What I have said, Sir, is truth; and if I make it not appear, let me answer it
with my life; And the day has been, when your Highness would not have checked
me for speaking truth; Nor this Table have let any one man grow so great, by
his guilt, that we durst not accuse him; It Is an ill President thus to
encourage Traitors. Had Martino fallen under your Justice when he sold his
first Master, 'twould not have been a crime, in me, to have accused him now.
What makes Carlo defend him, but he finds he is grown so powerful? non dare
speak their fears; And your Highness bounty has so changed his condition, and
set such a stamp upon him, that he appears the greater part of your self; Nay,
the honest part of the world sticks not to say you have forgot what he was.
Take heed, Sir, his wickedness be not called yours too; for his Crimes are
such, even the Women (you see) have lost their pity for him, and I pray Heaven,
it be not too late for your Highness, or Justice it self, to take notice of
him; So powerful he is, that the Law dares not speak to him; and he is now so
guilty, that he is become Innocent; for who is beyond the Laws reach, He is
more guilty; And, if not prevented, we shall see him begin to give Laws both to
your self and people; to prevent which, again, I beg your Highness would but
read that letter; Behold these wounds, do they speak less then destruction to
the name of Sforza? Grant Cosmo living, Is he Innocent? Behold these wounds
given your own Bowels; Do Justice for these, and Justice is easy to all but
the wicked; Mercy is first due to the Innocent, and from them, let the guilty
beg, and find it; it is safer far, then to leave the Innocent to the mercy of a
Traitor


What can you say against Ferdinando's reason? His honest heart will excuse his
passion; and grant Cosmo living; yet behold his Prince wounded and designed for
his grave, if this be Martino's Letter


For the Princes wounds, I can say nothing, but mourn the unhappy accident; The
Count made his own answer to that particular; and for the Letter, it ought to
be punished with exquisite torture and death, if (as your Highness says) it be
proved his; I know his hand, but cannot say, upon life and death, this is his,
since the Count denies it; the Soldier would give some light in the business,
could your Highness prevail to have him produced; it is not well to conceal or
dismiss him at this time, in a business thus important; for his evidence would
sway much, either to the clearing or convicting of the Count; Treason has that
curse with her, she is never quite rooted out; nor justice cannot cut so even,
but even truth and innocence it self may suffer


Who brought this Letter?


'Twas I, Sir, gave it your Highness.


Where had you it?


That I would gladly know.


I gave it her.


O, then 'twas your Highness brought the first news of this to Court; then I
have done, else --


What else, impudence? speak thy heart, without these abrupt and dark sayings,
without your scandalous -- else: Or, by my life, there is no place shall
privilege you from being nailed at my foot, you Traitor


Hold, and give good reason for this anger; lest I doubt the justice of your
cause


If your Highness fears had no more cause to put on your disguise to day, then
you have to be angry now, I shall hope the Count innocent in the one cause, as
I am in the other


It Is enough, Sir, you know there is a cause; and time shall tell it, in the
mean time I will take my leave


O stay, for heavens sake, stay; for honor and all our peace, stay; and if you
know any thing can clear this business, speak it freely; and let not our souls
be afflicted with the doubt; speak, Sir, and let the Traitors find the
vengeance due to them only; now you afflict the innocent with your doubts and
dark speeches


Pray, Madam, let me go before murder has its will.


Why this answer? is this the return for all my kindness and love to Sforza?


O impudence!


Sir, it is but justice she and all the world desires; the Duke, Sir, would know
where you had this Letter


Villain, Traitor, Murderer, whose impudence has broke my resolution; dare
thou call for justice that wertt he Messenger of death? thou Traitor, impudent
wretch, 'twas thou that gave this Letter to Baptista, and this Ring; let who
dare own it,


It Is sad to have my Prince my accuser; else the Law of Honor would do me
justice, and the world find I wear a sword; it is hard, Sir, to be thus accused,
and no witness dares appear


Give me the Ring, and all leave the place but you Victoria, and Ferdinando
and; Giovanni bid Sforza come hither; and Ferdinando command the Guard to watch
this night upon my Chamber, and be you in person with them; this Ring I gave
Julia; if she be false


If?


If? Ferdinando, can you accuse her?


Will you have patience, Sir, till I prove what I say? if not you will yet see
your whole name destroyed


Speak, but remember I love Julia; yet if she can be guilty of this, the earth
shall not redeem her; can Julia be false to me


False as hell; it is her name is blotted out of the Letter; the Prince in pity
of Fidelia did it, because he would not have her grieved with the infamy of her
Mother


But what could she hope by killing Cosmo?


O, Sir, that is a mischief which is yet a Riddle to the world; and secret to
all but my self and Fidelia; Cosmo lives


Live! Cosmo living!


I must not, cannot, dare not speak my knowledge, much less my fears; only, for
certain, Cosmo lives, and Martino dishonours you, and Julia's false; and now
the villain is in hold we will make ready our proofs; and, for heavens sake,
trust none of them till we have made it appear that they, or we, are faulty;
this accusing Martino, and railing against Carlo in public, is too gross to
blind any eye that has observed them as Victoria has done; Cosmo went hence in
a disguise, to question my Brother about the Command of the Army, which is the
true cause why Sforza came in disguise to Millain


This is a knowledge your highness should have had sooner, but that we are
resolved to accuse none till their treachery is visible; and pray be pleased to
keep your old kindness to the Duchess, and continue your coldness in believing
the Princesses accusation, for a day or two, till all things are ready; this
night we will meet at your Highness Chamber, and there resolve in order to our
business; and, pray, let the Dutchesses part be concealed, for the Princess
Fidelia's sake


'T will break her heart; the first news of her Brothers death had almost
distracted her


They are a pair of virtuous minds, and I am glad to find Victoria so kind to
them; and since he^ven has preserved him from this storm, My Cosmo shall find I
loved and valued him


Let us retire, Madam, that we may get the Guard in arms; and then I will wait
upon you in the Princes lodging; our stay may beget their jealousy, for guilt
is still upon the Alarm


The Gods bless my child; and, pray, tell Sforza, I want not any of that
kindness a Father owes to a good Son, though I cry not my love in the streets;
which he shall now find, in cutting from my breast what has long been dearest
to me, even Julia, since she is false


God forbid, though the tree be guilty, let the fruit plead; Fidelia has
goodness enough to expiate any crime she can commit with wishes, which is all
the ill she is yet arrived to


YOu are sad, Martino.


No, Madam; but my heart's awaked with this storm; and I am glad to find our
mischief was so unsuccessful, since Julia could accuse me


And could thou be so faulty as to think Julia false? Oh, my soul! had not I
my masterpiece to act; and though we have bravely gone through with it, 'twas
a troubled sea we wrought through to gain this Harbor; and here shall still be
Martino's safety, My Cosmo is safe; and while the Duke rests in doubt, we must
dispatch Sforza, let me alone to settle all the rest; this was Carlo's plot;
the honest Soldier (that is without) too did his part; whom they are now busy
inquiring after; therefore, sor a day or two, till Sforza be dead, let him lie
concealed here


Sforza's death is a counsel I could wish you would abandon; for though it may
serve in this our desperate disease, yet what the success must be those that
know there are Gods may easily divine; to murder three such innocents, one of
them your own too, it is black and terrible; and I fear will be so far from
confirming Cosmo in the Throne you design him, 'twill rather make him odious to
both Nations


I know the price of those Jewels; but since the storm would not be resisted,
rather then let our Barque sink we must throw over our richest goods


Be patient till I am gone, and observe what effect that change will have;
Cosmo has virtues enough, and needs none of those dark paths to lead him to a
Crown; and though he be innocent, yet I fear the Gods should punish our faults
upon him; and we but make our selves monsters, and him miserable, only showing
him that Crown which will be snatched from him, and given to some third
pretender


No matter; if Cosmo cannot keep a Crown when we have given it him, let him
that wins it wear it; he is Julia's heir that can succeed her; the generous
Conqueror is my child; and I shall hate my self for designing Cosmo so much
honor, if he want courage to keep it; I am none of that sort of foolish women
that love. their own fruit best though it be sower; it is thy interest, and the
memory of those happy hours that makes Cosmo dear to me; I know not why dull
custom should make us love a fool or coward, because got in Wedlock; a natural
accident in Marriage, and the cold effect of a dull thoughtless Act, which
every Beast and Bird does as well as we; and before it should be said I love
Cosmo for those Reasons, he should this night fill a grave, with those foolish
souls we have condemned, while the brave, the daring and the fortunate were
adopted; and I will still believe the Conqueror is our Son, who ere he be; and
Cosmo changed in the Cradle, though the false Nurse deny it. No, Martino, thou
have taught me to know we are our own Gods; those thrive here that dare
Fortune, she knows neither conscience nor prayer, she is a woman, young, naked
and blind; they say, Youth and Courage binds her; and if Cosmo cannot force a
naked woman, let him rest despised for Julia. -- See where Carlo comes. Carlo,
what news


You have no time to spare; the Duke has all this while been in counsel with
his Daughter and Ferdinando; and you may find by Victoria's briskness, she
knows Prince Cosmo is safe; the Guard is in arms too, commanded by Ferdinando;
and we must expect nothing but ruin


And where is the Prince and Princess?


They are all safe, at the Princes Chamber, upon a visit; we have laid our
design, I am now come for the Soldier: Come, friend, when we have played this
part all is our own; when they are in the grave we will return, and call you;
till then, pray be private here


IF it be possible I will find the Pilgrim, his testimony will confirm all; and
then I will return with a guard to prevent the worst of malice


Kind and faithful Ferdinando still; all good success attend thee.


Pray, Sir, retire to your lodging; small wounds neglected may bring a
dangerous consequence; you know, Sir, there be many lives depend on Prince
Sforza


Fear not, Madam, since I have cured those wounds that grief and distraction
gave by your displeasure, my heart can know no danger; when Fidelia smiles,
Sforza is all joy and peace


Heaven protect the Prince; and when I lose not his value, I care not who
frowns; I had wounds too, and they bled as long as Sforza was angry; but we are
now perfectly happy


The Gods were kind to Victoria, that spared Sforza, and preserved Cosmo; Julia
too is innocent, in spite of Treason, which false Martino would have betrayed
her into; and time will heal all these wonnds that Love and Fortune have dealt
among us


What noise is that?


Resist not, Sir; these dye, if you resist.


Is Antonio false too? Heaven! is there nothing but treachery among men? this I
foresaw in that feigned death of Cosmo


Antonio false! perhaps Cosmo is dead too; if he be, let thy words stab
Victoria to the heart


If there be any honest thought left in thy mind, Antonio, lead me to the
Princess Fidelia, that I may dye (what I could not live) her Sforza


O, Sir, these men have added cruelty even to death! had I died yesterday when
Sforza was angry, 'twould not have been half the grief; but to be reconciled to
Sforza, and then snatched from his friendship, is beyond Murder, cruel. O,
Sir, it is now too late to say that truth which my modest heart could never find
yet strength enough to utter; yet, witness heaven, it is a truth my heart will
break with; Prince Sforza was all the business of my mind, how I loved him I
shall not live to tell; yet here upon his breast, with my last breath, I vow my
first and most unspotted faith


This cold kiss on your fair hand shall be both our Epithalamium and our
Epitaph; O, gentle Fidelia! we were one in friendship, and one in misery


That the Gods should give to Beasts venom in their eyes, and death in their
teeth, to destroy the innocent, and not afford us that power in an hour of
misery, for a guard against Murder and Treason


Away, where I appointed, and observe your Order.


THey have been long, but now I believe he comes; for now I hear a noise in the
Vault


It Is they.


Carlo, is all ready?


Yes, they are seized and bound, and in the Cyprus Grove expect us, your horses
too are ready, we shall have the sport to pass that way; and see them whine and
dye, and then away


But whither shall I go? that I may hold a correspondence, and advise you of my
resolutions, as occasion presents


You must find out my Son and Count Baptista; but you must not let the foolish
Boy know of what is past; his passion makes him deaf to all our reasons


Come, come dispatch, Sir, the time is precious.


Madam, this shadow goes, you see, forced hence by cruel stars; other joy I
never knew then Julia's friendship, with whom I must leave this parting kiss.
Farewell to all that is dear to Martino; witness my Soul, I have no joys but in
those Eyes, and till we meet again my sad heart will know no peace


Farewell, Martino; Julia can yet say she found a friend that was faithful, and
it is not in Fate to divide our hearts; How unwillingly shall I let my Eyes lose
this object, witness all the kindness that my life has showed thee; I should
hate my self, if I thought I had words to express how much I have loved
Martino. Farewell, I have too much Woman in my Eyes, I cannot suffer this
separation without tears; Separation is death of Friendship, my Soul and I now
part. This kiss to my dear Cosmo


Ye Gods, what do I see and hear? O Villain, Villain.


Go before with the Lanthorn. --


Carlo, give me your hand. --


WHy do thou delay thy bloody purpose? If it be Repentance holds thy hand,
make it good; I will purchase it at any rate to save those Innocents; and I
will die too, that thou may have thy reward from those that hire thee


O Sir, we hear them coming; now it is the time, farewell for ever.


Are they bound?


Yes, Sir.


It Is they, wear your swords in readiness.


Where are they?


In the Arbor.


Let us dispatch them, Carlo, and away.


Hah! O Carlo we are betrayed.


What noise is that?


This way, Antonio. -- Do you see this sight, Sir?


Yes, what is thy meaning? art thou false, or no? Why do thou fright our
hopes


Upon them, and dispatch; you will find this no jesting matter.


Ha, Martino at liberty?


Martino loose? nay then we are lost for ever.


Why do thou not kill them?


Or let me do it.


That is the Soldier brought news of my Brothers death.


And that face I have seen before.


I thought you had forgot it.


No, 'twas thou that savd'st me, when Baptista would have murdered me.


What says he?


Enough to satisfy me, we are all betrayed.


Sir, I saved you once.


And why should thou not again be honest? Threats are lost where they meet
Minds resolved like ours; yet if thou dare save these, they will pray so
faithfully for thee, that thou may kill me and be forgiven; All the horror
thou can put into thy look I can despise; for the valiant man, in his first
thought, digests the necessity of death; And since we cannot avoid that sight,
I have long since Philosophyed upon my grave, as the second womb, and the
certain way to the other world, as my Mothers led to this; and he that is
honest only sees those dangers. The guilty trembling Coward, it is he that
tastes the bitter cup, while his pale Soul labors and feels the throws of
every apprehended Dart, whose anguish (Gentle Fidelia) is in leaving thee, and
kind Victoria; Those that fear him suffer in every thought, and languish in
expectation; For, dying, not death is the wound; and when death will appear,
though in a Fever, Martino, Carlo, Treason and the Sword, are there


O Sforza, talk of death, but not of parting; when we can die without that,
these threatened wounds are welcome; Fever, Sword, nor Treason, I fear not, they
are our slaves, and would be tame things if death and malice (Enemies to Nature
and Fidelia) did not set them on to destroy Noble Sforza. O be still that good
man, and let not these Villains prevail with thee to murder the Prince; Hell
and curses are on their side, Innocence and Virtue on the Princes; if thou
kil'st him, thou art damned; save him, and become an Angel


Strike, fool, or she will talk thee to the Gallows; Dos't thou not know the
intent in Treason, is as guilty and as mortal as the blow


Thou art a fool, we are all betrayed; and now I see him through all his cloud;
it is Cosmo, Carlo


It Is so, horrid Villain; what can thy Soul tell thee now, but death and misery
attend thee


Cosmo?


Cosmo?


It Is my Brother.


Villain, can thou look upon this spectacle? Does not thy Soul melt with
horror? Dog, I will kill every limb of thee apart. Kill that Villain


Oh! oh!


Sir, I beg your pardon for this fright, there was no safety without it; I
could not else have betrayed these Monsters from their security, but with the
hope of such a bait; But now I will offer their hated limbs a sacrifice to all
our fears


O my Cosmo, joy of my life, unbind the Prince.


I have another business to dispatch first; I must be grateful as well as
just; The sword, Antonio. --


Do you know it, Sir?


Yes, and what of it?


When I was down in the battle of Pavia, then thou bestridst me, and gave me
this with a wish I might never lose when I drew it against my Enemy; Here, take
this other, while I prove thy wish upon thee. Antonio, if I fall, let the Law
proceed to Justice against this Villain, and secure the lives of these Princes


Why do you arm the Traitor?


There is no danger in a known Traitor: it is the Trust that makes them
dangerous; and Traitors in the field are but upon their way to Execution


I will not hope to escape; yet I have known the day when I would have forced
my safety through more stops then your Arm threatens; But I was innocent then,
and yet the greatest of Cosmo; and Heaven is just in making him my scourge


I will hear no more. -- That for Fideli^.


For Martino, that.


For Sforza, that, and that, and that for Julia; let that name sink thee and
thy Soul. --


I faint, O Cosmo! I have yet kindness enough in all this blood, to fear and
pity what Fate attends thee that have killed thy Father; a secret yet to Cosmo


What said he?


No matter what.


How do you, Sir? has he hurt you?


Yes, but not much; Take up their Bodies, Antonio, and carry them to my Mothers
Lodging; Madam, to prevent this danger, I was fain to break my word with your
Highness; and that necessity, I hope, will plead your pardon


I am glad, you had a reason for that fault.


The Story of this accident, how laid and how prevented, will ask an ages time
to relate; but till the danger is past we must defer it; and I must beg, for an
hour or two, you let me lie concealed, and in this disguise, till I have
finished my work; I must now find my Mother; O Sister, she must be reclaimed
with Tears, not Wounds; And I must beg your Highness company, to make her shame
the greater. The horror of her designs I will present unto her as things
executed; and when I have brought her to a repentance, and a despair of Peace,
then, as a Mercy beyond her hopes or merit, she shall know how Heaven has
miraculously preserved her innocence from all this blood; This way I hope to
reclaim that unfortunate Woman, now the authors of her sins are gone


Pray lead the way.


THis night is full of change; within this hour nothing but despair, yet now my
heart has Joy again; and Sforza once dead, Victoria shall marry Cosmo; The
fright Carlo will put her in, when she sees Fidelia die, will make her proud
heart stoop to Cosmo, I know she loves him; This day her Passion appeared, at
the report of his death; and though she pretends that she has vowed her self to
a Monastery when her Father dies, yet I doubt not but she may be won to forsake
that cold pretense for a warm Palace; Those Nuptials will crown all my
thoughts; and then 'twas a happy loss of Pavia, if we gain Millain; both which
will be the reward of my long travel. The Duke must die ere they can Wed; for
since we are stepped in, we must now go thorough with the work: Lust and ambition
know no bounds; and rather then we will see my Cosmo less then we design him,
we will raise new diseases, scourges of the time, and Act what Age and sickness
could not do. What noise is that


Madam, the Count, and Carlo, kiss your hands.


Are they gone?


Yes, Madam.


And the rest? how? how?


Dead, all Dead.


And was not Sforza sad to depart with Fidelia, and the World?


They made a great Ceremony of it; and by my troth, it was sad; I did what I
was not wont to do, I pityed him; for 'twas a gallant and a stout Gentleman;
the Women too lamented so, it almost staggered my resolution; and I think,
though your soul hates them, 'twould have grieved your heart to have seen them
part; She that died, (Fidelia I think you called her) fell, ere we struck, upon
the sight of Sforza's death


Are you so pityful? he will tell, if not prevented.


Madam, the Count bid me tell your Highness, he thinks it fit Carlo dies too;
for he knows too much, and grows too sawey, upon the Trust you have given him


We will think on it; let us talk no more at this time, it is late; is any body
stirring in the Gallery


No, Madam, all is whist.


Take this purse, and conceal thy self for a day or two, and then find Martino;
for I would have thee always near him; thou have a bold heart, and a ready
hand; here, give him this Ring from me; you wear a privy Coat


No, Madam.


The more fool you, in these dangerous Occasions; I will try.


Oh! hold, wretched Woman.


Thou art too pityful a fool to trust a Crown to.


Hold, hold, it is Cosmo that thou have murdered.


What said he? Cosmo?


O my Brother! poor Cosmo! unfortunate youth!


Cursed Woman, shame of thy Sex, what have thou done?


Inhumane Act, O Julia, thy soul will ache for this; lift him up Antonio, and
send for a Surgeon quickly, some one raise the Court; Try if there be any hope
of life


Sforza alive? and Fidelia too? Cosmo dead? and Martino Dead! O wretch, it is
too sad a Truth; it is he, my dear Cosmo? Thou were my beloved sin, all my
crimes were loves to Cosmo, and now my greatest sin is thy blood; all that I
loved dead? And all Cosmo, for thy mother: I struck not thee with half so good
a will; Thus I shall be Julia still, my story is of one piece now


O! hold her desperate hand --


No, it is too late, Antonio; Julia was Julia's Fate; yet ere I die, you that
live, forgive, and bring Fidelia hither. Fidelia, whom my life hated, but my
death loves, forgive thy mother; and live still the thing she hated, the
Religious, Chaste, and faithful Fidelia; and let thy name redeem the Honor I
have lost, in story; does any know how Martino came by his death


Yes, Madam; Cosmo, in Duel, killed him.


Cosmo kill Martino? Nay, then 'twas fate, not Julia, struck Cosmo; Unfortunate
youth! wicked and guilty by chance; What fate guided him to Cosmo's sword?
Heavens! None but a Son to spill a Fathers blood, and a Mother to revenge it


What does she say?


Sir, I am loath to be the Author of such a scandal; yet I heard Martino, when
he fell under Cosmo's sword, tell him he had killed his Father; your Highness
knows their Friendship has been scandalous, though the world durst not speak of
it


Dead? heaven forbid.


Pray, Sir, retire the Scene is too sad; for a Fathers Eyes; The Story, Sir,
will be fitter to be mourned then spoken of; the Gods have taken a severe
vengeance upon those people, and we may lament, but not redeem, their faults;
Come, Madam, when you can digest this grief you shall find Sforza is ready to
pay all his vows to Love and Friendship


No, Brother, Sister, Father, all that were guilty, in making me break my vows
with Heaven, here I beg the dead Body of my Cosmo may be interred in our
Chapel, where again I vow to waste my days in Holy Orders, and with the
Penance of my life redeem my past faults, and lament poor Cosmo


Oh, Sir, let me retire too; Let not such a poisonous fruit be cherished in
your breast, lest the displeased Gods take some farther vengeance on Our
Family; and so distract my soul, to find Prince Sforza punished for Fidelia's
sins


This misery is so strange, and so infectious, that even my heart grows sick of
Love, and fear; Heaven, if thou have decreed more affliction for this gentle
maid, let them not fall till I am earth. O Fidelia, nothing but death shall
divide me from thee


Take up their Bodies, and let all Funeral Rites be given to these unfortunate
people: and since they have born the punishment of their Crimes, let their
faults have no more memory, but, with them, lie buried in their Grave; And let
their Example teach us; Impious men may play with Heaven, but they can hope no
better fate to Win. Dry thy Eyes, Fidelia, Heaven forbid, thy Innocence should
suffer for the Crimes of others; To whom there is a reward due, as a punishment
to these; And if Sforza do not pay his Debts to Fidelia, he will neither have
Heavens nor my blessing; and when Our griefs have given place, I shall only
wish, that my last Scene in this world may wait on thy Hymen's; for I am quite
tired with the Affliction of this World, and will only refresh my soul with
seeing Fidelia and Sforza happy; And then I care not how soon Nature and Death
decide their dispute; That I might make an Exit from this Theater where
misfortune has made me Act a Part in so sad a Tragedy



