THE SECOND PART OF Cicilia and Clorinda, OR, Love in Arms. A TRAGI-COMEDY, The
Scene LOMBARDY

Written in FLORENCE BY THOMAS KILLIGREW.

DEDICATED TO THE Lady DOROTHY SIDNEY COUNTESS OF SUNDERLAND.

LONDON: Printed by J. M. for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the sign of the Blew Anchor, in the lower Walk of the New-Exchange. 1663

SEe, Sir, I am here, according to your desire; But know, till I had read your
Paper, I had nothing of Quarrel to you; But that had so little of Lucius, I
cannot but hate my Fortune, when I consider my self out-rival'd by one that has
so low a thought of the Princess; In whose name and revenge I draw my Sword


It Is better well-come then your words; For the wounds


'Twas the noise of Swords, -- ha! 'Two fighting. -- Ye gods! Lucius and
Amadeo, my Rivals: why does heaven thus tempt me? -- Prince Amadeo, as you have
honor, hold; Why Lucius, Amadeo, Lucius, Brother, pray hold


Ha, Manlius! Lucius, if I would injure you, I could say, this is not well to
have your Brother here; But I am so confident of his Honor, that I cannot fear
an Injury from him


How comes this? Did you not promise, you calmly would Expect your Fortunes,
and not lose a Mistress, and a Friend both? have I, for this, labored both
your Interests with the like faith and reality, neither swayed by the
Partiality of a Brother, nor the kindness of a Friend, to find you two
destroying all my hopes, and your own? What ridiculous thought is that which
tells you, your Swords should decide who shall have the Princess? Does your
Highness think that she, or her friends, will be won with a Murder? Or can
Lucius, after all his practice, and knowledge of Cicilia, so mistake her, as to
believe she will be set the Reward of the successfullest Sword? Now she will
despise you both for this bold claim you lay to her; It Is not now, who she will
shall be happy; A duel, Not her kindness must dispose of it; As if Cicilia were
a thing any may have that can catch her: I am ashamed to find you have lost
your Reasons; How must the Praetor and the Prince understand this, when they
find themselves so far neglected? when they find a Sister and a Daughter cut
from their Power by a Duel? Lucius, this Jealous anger will destroy all your
hopes; Pray, Sir, let me know the cause of this sudden change


Your brother can best inform you, who, this morning called me out; But, why, I
am yet Ignorant


Your Highness is not so ignorant of the cause as you pretend, though my
brother be; To whom I now confess what your Highness already knows; Know then,
After the Princess, in the presence of Calis and the gods, gave to thy brother
her hand, in faith of Friendship, and her vows were writ in Heaven; yet, after
this, Building on his greatness, The Prince, and his party, have seduced her
heart, and, by the Interest of a Brother, they have made Cicilia false, and
Lucius miserable


Ha! What says he?


Otho, too, ungrateful Otho, All my services thrown by, has Interessed himself
in my Ruin, and has chid, and threatened his Sister to her dishonor; Otho,
Manlius, Otho, for whom I so often have shed my blood, has gained the Pretors
consent for Prince Amadeo, and Cicilia must be his; And thy brother, (after her
faith given) Rejected; Now if these Injuries be fit for Lucius to bear, then
chide him; if not, retire, and let me finish my Revenge, and do not thou Join
in my dishonor too


Is this Truth, or do you both conspire to make me mad?


Truth, by Heaven, after she had given her faith to thy Brother.


Put up your Sword then, and take a secret from a desperate heart; Know, I hate
you both, and Cicilia is the Cause; Cicilia has begot that hate; Hell on all
your Trust, would you had been struck blind, and dumb both, when you saw her
first, then your praise had never betrayed me to my ruin. Why did you send me
to her when you found such Magic in her Eyes, as neither of you could resist?
Why should you believe me such a fool, or so blind, as not to love, or Court
such a Blessing? Why should you believe Manlius so cold or Dull, when he saw
such a prize, such a reward for Honor, calmly to sit still while you possessed
her? What claim has either, more then Manlius, But that you saw her first


Sure, he raves.


No, Lucius, I love: and, despair of what I love makes me hate the fortunate
Lover; And who ever he be, let him be sure I am in my grave before he dare
possess her; For by Heaven, I will kill him; And since Amadeo is like to be the
man, let him defend himself; she knows, I love; and I know she hates me for
having said so


Hold, by all thy past Honors, or I will strike thee at my Feet; it is no tie
of blood shall make me spare thee; Though I have lost Cicilia, I will preserve
my self fit for her in all her virtues


Why should not I be revenged, as well as Lucius?


Take your time; If he out live me, The man will fight; you know he will, you
have tried him; What would the world say, if he should die now? would they not
call us Treacherous and Cowards, that betrayed a Gallant stranger, and called
him forth, under pretense of Honor, to Murder him


Who dares say so, while we live?


All dare say, and believe it too.


You had best resolve, Sir, We lose time; for thee (Manlius) I scorn to claim a
friendship with thee; Yet my wonder would fain know, why you are so furious?
Sure it is no news to Manlius, that I love the Princess


You, and all the world may love her, so she loves me; But Cicilia loves
Lucius, and Amadeo shall enjoy her if I prevent it not; This is the cause of
all my Anger: I profess my self an Enemy to any thing more fortunate then I am
in my Love; And if you have her Fathers Consent, and he hers, what rests then
but despair for me? Resolve therefore which will be first; for by degrees, I
will either fall, or destroy you both; Think not upon any other Enemy, while I
am upon the Earth


His love is not more new, then Extravagant; But if Lucius will look on, I am
ready to punish thy falsehood to a friend, and a brother


And I, to kill a happy Rival, that must, I know, despise me, because my
Mistress does so; All the world will see Rascal writ in my face, if I outlive
story, that have lost a Friend, a Brother, and mine Honor too, for nothing;
Baubles, such as Children play with, will be more precious then the name of
Manlius; 'Twill become a by-name for Treachery and Folly: Despised and false as
Manlius, I will not live to see the Day, -- Defend your self. -- Lucius, to let
her go when her faith was thine? 'Twas Lucius made her hate and despise me.
When I was faulty she loved thee, jealous mad man, for which defend thy poor
heart


Manlius, Lucius! What Planet has struck these men? Are


Tell me not of reason, Honor, Friend, nor Brother, They are all Idle sounds,
without love; Without her love I am an Enemy to all the world; therefore spare
your tongue, and use your sword; This Oracle shall tell you who is designed for
Cicilia's love; Do not despise my words, for you shall not be so diligent to
gain her Love, but this shall be as sollicitous in the destruction of what she
loves


Perfidious, Degenerate Wretch, Coward, Bastard, no Brother of Lucius; hence
thou barbarous Dog, be gone; or, by all the gods, that thou have profaned,
under my feet I will tread thy hated flesh


How often have you seen Manlius thus treated, Sir? you strike me at your foot!
Begin when you dare, you will find this Dog bite as sharp as Lucius; defend
thee


That Is Dyon's voice, Hell upon this Beast; We are pursued, I must take some
other time; Sir, I know the Pretors Rage is not to be met now, I shall
therefore retreat, till I can find a fitter time to receive the satisfactio
nthis Madman has hindered


Pursue Lucius, while we secure these; is your Highness wounded?


It seems so, in parting those Madmen; Pray have an Eye to Manlius, for his
designs are false and mischievous


Pray, Sir, retire, your wounds bleed apace.


NOw you know why we committed you to your Chamber, and conjured you neither to
send, nor receive a Challenge from those Brothers; And I believe by this time
Cicilia is reasonably mortified with the Paper I gave her; Come, Madam, let us
give the Prince a visit, I hear his wounds are slight; and I doubt not but that
I shall give his Highness full satisfaction, if Dyon Execute my Orders


Manlius, they say, prevented them.


I am sorry the Praetor was so severe with the Princess, lest she may believe I
am sollicitous, to the prejudice of Lucius, in this business, which (as well as
I love Amadeo) I would not do for all the world


Come, Madam, time will heal all these wounds; Love has his Morning and his
Evening fair; and though he threatens storms at Noon, yet he gives us time to
dispatch our business in


MY Lord, if you have any friendship for Lucius, immediately find him, and let
him know what has past here this morning; tell him there is no time to delay
his fortune; and if he has a hope to continue his friendship with the Princess,
let him this night come to the Garden-house in some disguise: Amadeo and
Clorinda have prevailed, and his Bando will this day be revoked; by this means
there may be some hopes to reconcile himself to the Princess; when he is there
give me notice, and I will contrive it so, that he shall speak with her; you
may tell him how unhandsome and how injurious an action his jealous madness has
made him commit against the Princess; while you do this, I will go find the
miserable Manlius, whose treachery is now discovered by himself; the noble
Cicilia concealed his crime, in kindness to his Brother; what to say to him, I
know not, when I see him. When his heart was at leisure and innocent, he would
not be just to me; and now I know his crimes lie too heavy on his mind to
listen to what I shall say of Love or Reason; yet I will find him


Pray do so, and till I return have a care that he and the Prince meet not, for
'twill not pass without some unlucky accident; they are both incensed, the one
with his guilt, and the other with injuries


I shall use all diligence to prevent their meeting.


It Is most certain, Sir, they fought this morning under the wood side; Lucius
is banished too, and the Praetor highly incensed; if I meet him, have at his
head, there is liberty, revenge, and reward, and your Rival gone; the princess
is daily pressed to the marriage with Amadeo, whose wounds are slight though he
keeps his Chamber


There is no Star favorable to Orante, else I might have been by this morning,
and with a seasonable thrust or two decided this business; but I am resolved,
thus disguised I will to Court; and ere Lucius can return I will spoil their
mirth. Who is that? observe,


Who are those? inquire of them the way to the Temple.


Good woman, which way must we take to find the old Temple of Juno?


The first broad Path on your left hand will lead you to the ruin of an old
Altar, from which a Path will conduct you through the Grove to the Temple of
the great Goddess, which stands upon the hill; in whose sacred name bestow some
charity upon a poor wretch, despised and abandoned by gods and men


There; is it far thither?


A little half hours walk for my aged feet; but you that have youth and
strength will in a thought arrive


There it is, we are to meet him.


It Is Dyon and his Soldiers in search of Lucius.


Dyon is his friend.


The better, and we shall the sooner find him, by tracing them; you are
certain, if they were enemies he should never have known where he was; observe
their motion, quick, follow them, if we find him we will make a sad sacrifice
to Juno; be all ready and diligent, I will dog them, as if to beg; and when I
stab him, be ready to second me


NO more; I am not worth thy care, nor kindness; thy goodness upbraids me, and
thy friendship makes me haste to finish what I have resolved


By all that ever was precious to Manlius I conjure him to hold that desperate
hand; why should Manlius think the world so wicked as not to pardon him one
folly, a fault only in the intention? Alas, thou art so far from being wicked,
that thou mistak'st thy own good actions; this cruelty thou show thy self to
prevent a sin, is more innocent then never to have been tempted


Thy kindness mistakes me, and do not see the wickedness that is in my mind
bent to the destruction and dishonor of what I love, if not prevented; and
when it is done, Remember I must dye; consider that, and then thy kindness will
kill me, while I am worth dying; here take this Dagger, strike, and save
Manlius; if thou let'st me live to commit this violence, all the earth will
stab me with their curses, and I shall fall unpitied and unmourned; be kind
therefore, and kill me, or I shall kill my self, An act abhorred by all the
gods; and thus only thou can save Manlius


He is distracted sure; Heaven! do you offer me your Dagger? would you have me
that love Manlius become his murderer? unkind, is this the return of all my
love and service? though thy insensible heart would never be brought to return
my love; yet, methinks, thou might be contented that I was miserable all the
days of my life, without seeking to draw murder upon me, to rob my soul of her
peace too


How much thou mistak'st the justice of this act, in executing me; thou but
savest the lives of two innocent persons, which thus, by chance, the gods have
given to thy protection; and if thou now refusest to prevent my sins, it is
Calis, not Manlius is guilty hereafter; it is Calis murders Lucius; it is Calis
that ravishes Cicilia; it is Calis that stabs Manlius to the soul, by resusing,
now he is innocent, to prevent what she knows he is bent to act; Kill me then,
and save thy friend, Kill me and save a family, Kill me now, and all good men
shall mourn for me; for to have been tempted is no sin, thou say, it is
yielding to temptation makes the crime, thus to resist would be an honor; and
thus would thou show thy virtue and mine, that choose rather to dye then to
be wicked; and kind Calis durst kill what she loved, rather then see him
outlive his honor


This Reason bids her love, and save thee; and Manlius ought to glory in, not
punish, this nobleness in his mind, whose heart is so full of honor he will
rather dye then think a sin; be still so severe, be still an enemy to that
design, it is like your self; he or she that never was tempted ought not to
glory in their innocence, but to praise their good luck; and now my friend
hates himself most I love him best; now when he would destroy himself he is fit
to be protected by all good things


You will not kill me then?


Heaven forbid. --


For pity, for charities sake, do not leave me; or if you


DId you ever love her?


Love Cicilia? yes, with my soul, and she deserved it then; for she had honor,
beauty, and a thousand graces; such excellencies too, as are strangers to all
the minds and faces I ever saw, or practiced; this even my hate and fear must
confess; but her mind, of late, has stooped, if not to sin and dishonor, yet
guilty vanity has stained it; she cannot love enough to oblige any man, and yet
she loves so much as has disobliged a Nation; to be born in her own Country is
a crime, and cause enough to be despised; why else were Valerius, Polydor,
Thersis, or Turnus, neglected? Men that through the whole world have had
public Honor, famous Amadeo only is mentioned with honor, at his danger she
starts, and grows pale at the sight of his wounds; a wanton wanderer only in
his way to Rome must make her break her faith to Lucius; and in scorn of the
Roman Nation, this Mountainer must have that presented him which we in tears
and wounds have begged; how often have we exposed our selves to certain dangers
to deserve from her a smile, while the emulous World grew Rivals for her
favors? how many great souls have unwillingly entered the Elizian shades,
because they were to leave the conversation of Cicilia here? but now that she
is false, who would live, or love


If this be so, why this rage? if her beauty has lost her power, and you your
love, let it rest like Tales ill told, unregarded and forgotten; but if they
have their power still, which your anger confesses, let me have leave to defend
them


Here needs no Argument; all that have eyes must confess Cicilia had all that
was beauty; but since she has broke her faith, it is become a Chaos all; for
perjured beauty is like flying Armies, and blasted Fields that have no grace,
no terror left, nor longer bear any mark or character of the Deities that moved
in them, but the wounds of those Rods that in vengeance have fallen upon them


You only can accuse the Princess of this fault, for your addresses are to the
world yet a secret; and Prince Amadeo's love, public as his person, even when
he was prisoner here; but that the Princess paid him more then civility; your
fears are the first that accuse her, and I believe, deceive even your self


Deceived! no Dyon, her love is as visible as her beauty, durst he, else, move
the Praetor for a consent, who you know dotes upon her, and her words like Laws
or Oracles have still been powerful with him? nor was he ignorant of our
friendship, no nor displeased; Come Dyon, you know she must consent before this
be acted, and then to entertain me in discourse in her own Chamber till you
came with a guard to make me a prisoner; her Brother too confined by a trick,
while her Favorite is left free, to conclude their Hymen's; and for the more
security, my injured hands were bound from revenging their treachery; what is
visible, if this be dark? the day is not more clear then her falsehood, and I
have traced him in his love; his steps are as visible as when in snow we chased
him; she is a Roman, Dyon, and will have her vanity satisfied; we that are her
slaves, Prince Orante and my self, and (the falsest of men) my Brother Manlius,
she is proud of all; Nay, Manlius has confessed his making love, ere she
detected the Traitor; proud of all, she can in triumph lead, but how she is
changed, witness gods and men! when I first received this fire which now
afflicts me, with what fear and silence I made my way to her! with what
reverence I approached her breast! till then unacquainted with love, as she
professed, kindly still interpreting every sigh; and fearing my fears only, she
could then read an humble motion; and every sad look had her pity and pleased,
when any handsome accident presented an occasion to please me; thus in silent
secretness we in friendship past our days undiscerned, or envied; the fish that
glides in the silent stream, the Parthian Arrow, nor Birds that gently cut the
air, make not less noise, nor leave less paths nor stains behind, then our
love; the most jealous eye, Dyon, could not perceive we thought of each other
when we had but one thought


How came you to fall from this height, thus to suspect her virtue? that her
eyes have the same majesty, appears by Amadeo's love, who deserves more then
Lucius, or she less then Lucius, else she would still hold her power, which
once with a look commanded him


Alas, Dyon, what signifies the fire in those eyes, to Lucius, since it is
exposed like those of the sacrifice, where every cold pretense may warm it
self? Cicilia's breast is now a shrine for every lame and blind passion, to
offer up their impotent loves to, and there they drop their sickly false tears;
this is it that puts a cloud before those stars; for eyes that with pleasure on
all faces roll, can no longer Lucius heart control


See the difference of men's opinions; you ground your displeasure upon that
which to me would be joy and satisfaction; for you complain because all the
world loves your Mistress; do you think Apollo would make the worse household
god for having had a Temple and an Oracle at Delphos? does not the fame of many
Oracles give us faith that there is truth in his answers, or is he lessened in
his Deity by having received a sacrifice, and given an answer? 'tisyour case,
nor has your jealousy any ground; for all those rivals you so apprehend come
but like pilgrims to the princess, they approach no nearer then her Temple
doors, her eyes, her ears, there they their offering pay, Cicilia is within;
and while Lucius keeps his virtue, they may knock at her heart, but he only
will be let in; for it is a truth, (that honor has in all ages proved) never
any woman that had honor lost it by being handsomely beloved; for while she is
pursued with honor, she can lose none; nor gain any when she pursues any man;
therefore leave this sullen retreat and jealous humor, and know if the
Princess be faulty it is when she seeks Lucius, not when Amadeo or Manlius Court
her; for it is certain, wooing women, if they do not want before, yet then they
lose something of their value; and I do here confidently pronounce the virtuous
Princess so innocent from all that you accuse her of, that she must commit a
fault ere she can pardon Lucius


Dyon judges by the eye, so did I once, and purchased her friendship at the
rate of my heart, because the prospect pleased me; but how sad and how
unhealthy the seat has proved the world can witness; but thou, Dyon, and the
rest that admire her now are but passengers, and such are by their eyes
deceived as I was; but stay and inhabit in her mind, and then tell me how vain,
how unconstant, and how ambitious Cicilia is of all friendships, which makes
her unworthy of any; her vows have no roots, and such trees every passion
shakes, and every cross withers


I have no patience to hear you give such a character of a heart you know too
great for such low thoughts to possess; and were you not my friend I should not
suffer it


Who knows better then I? she had a great and gallant heart, the Empire too her
own, till vanity betrayed it; but now it is torn and divided into several
states; Orante, Manlius, and Amadeo have their several Provinces there; so
might I, if I would be contented with a Colony; but I scorn a part, or corner
of a heart; and till Cicilia be again reduced to Monarchy, I am free


If you have reason, return; and with your presence prevent this danger; and
with your friendship defend her from such a destruction; this scandalous and
sullen retreat betrays her to the enemy; had you heard her plead this day to
the Praetor in your behalf, your soul would blush, and abhor this mean character


Have I denied my protection? did I not stay till she betrayed me to prison?
have I not like the kind Shepherd stood all storms, to guard her Flock; which
be it never so full or fair, if the Nymph that owns them subject be to stray as
they, by our gods, I would not her Shepherd be, to become Pan. A Mistress that
must be watched and folded every night, or else she will be gone, before I
would her Lover be, I would change conditions with that Tree. What do thou
gaze at? this Bracelet? it is hers; Dyon must confess, it is not Jasons Fleece
that I have won, though she Medea prove


I must not cross him now, his jealousy is too high wrought; besides, I know
his nature is easier led then drove; in this particular Lucius has some reason;
nor can I justify a Maid in such actions; for women that will give and take,
for fancy, are not safe; because custom may bring them to like some things so
well as to purchase them they may be persuaded to buy and sell; then the man
that can soonest flatter them into a bargain has the undoing of them


So he may; but whoever he be that will betray the Princess so, be sure Lucius
be first in his grave, else all my rage thrown by, I shall find love enough to
revenge, with sad fates, such a treason; for if I cannot suffer others to love
her, Dogs gnaw me when I outlive him that hates her, though it be my self


There is much more reason in this passion then in your other Arguments; for if
the Princess could have learned the guilt of other women, it is probable she
might have learned their craft too, and dissembled; which I am certain her
fervent kindness (pleading in tears upon her knees, vowing friendship and love
for Lucius, receiving no denial, making all his crimes so many loves to her,
and so many Arguments for her love and protection) will acquit her from; till
that fatal Paper, which you sent the Prince, was by her Father given her, which
when she had read she was struck with the unkindness, and the displeasure of
that thought that told Lucius had injured her


O Dyon, Dyon, thou have perfect Honor: a Faithful friend dwells in Dyon, one
whom misery nor passion has divided from his Friend; when all the World armed
against Lucius, he took my part; how I love thee for chiding me, and defending
what I love! But alas, my Friend, my heart is grown sick of Love and fear: You
must not believe all I say, I scarce do it my self; It Is my fear, not my faith,
that speaks in this passion; yet she was too cruel, because she might be
mistaken; Manlius mistook it you saw, for Love; how then can you blame me for
thinking I am robbed, when the Thief confesses the theft; guilty Manlius
confessed his Crime, which she hid, and cherished; But I hope, my Friend (when he
has told her of my fears) will present them too as the effects of a distracted
Lover, which I would fain beg her pardon for


Most gladly; It Is Calis her counsel too, that you should come in some disguise
to the Gardiners house this evening, where she will give you an opportunity of
speaking with the Princess


All my Rage, if she believe I love, will find her Excuse; for who is he that
loves and will not fear to lose the thing he loves? Dear Dyon, she had wont to
praise particularity and Constancy, and to admire it as the greatest virtue
either Sex could arrive at; and call them the minds Chastity* without which
what that woman will do with a Lover that Lusts so for a Lover, is easier
feared then prevented


This I shall say; only promise me to be quiet, till I come, and let your mind
be in repose


I obey.


It Is Lucius, and Dyon, let them pass; This Evening, we must dispatch our
business: Amadeo has her Fathers; But this Cicilia's heart, and both my hate;
and they shall both feel my rage as high as their hopes, or my despair; And
while they dispute which in her affection Highest stood; Despised Orante shall
fill the Scene with rage and Blood


HAs your Highness seen your Sister since this misfortune?


No, Madam; her griefs are yet too fresh; it is better to give her passion some
time to recover; This Night I mean to visit her, though I know her heart is
struck deep with the injury Lucius did her; which is the more unsupportable,
because we know his fault, which she cannot now hide from us, and therefore she
will punish; And who knows but that it may take off that obstinate kindness she
has set upon him


When you mention me, Sir, to her, pray only present my Service, and be
pleased to ask her, whether I shall have the honor of her Commands to Rome,
whither, within few days, I shall depart, that my absence may give her leave to
pursue her Friendship with Lucius, if it be his Fortune; and time, I hope, will
reconcile to her mind the Name of Amadeo; But ere I go I shall beg the Honor
to speak with her, and take a sad Farewell


Your Highness is Melancholy, and I hope a day or two will remove it, and this
resolution; To morrow, the Praetor has ordered to chase the Boar, a sport your
Highness has not often seen in the valleys


The open Country will sure make the Chase much more pleasant; for our hills
keep us from being in at the fall, which is the heat, and pleasure of the Chase


This is for to morrow; But I must know where to wait upon your Highness when
Lysander returns, for I hear he has met with Lucius; I confess I would gladly,
this Night, undeceive him, and if it were possible, embrace him as a friend;
And then I may hope to see to morrow rise with Joy; For my heart witnesses I
have no rancour against him, since I perceived all his Injuries to me proceeded
from his Love to Cicilia; And since his Stars have preferred him before me; I
shall be so Civil to her choice, as to believe Lucius much more fortunate and
gallant then Amadeo


Trust me, Sir, this is a kind of Complement I understand not; and I here
profess, were I Rival with any Diety in the Love of fair Clorinda, I would make
no Complement at this rate, till Hymen had decided whose the Reward should be


THis from Lucius? sure he is mad to urge me thus.


Alas, Madam, it was love in Excess corrupted into Jealousy, (not he) that
said it, and his distraction is fitter for your pity, then your Anger. -- 'Twas
ill done of me, to tell her what he


Jealous? of whom? His own merit? that was only fit to be suspected; This
Paper is enough; he needed not to have Dyon, and too late, he will find it;
Cruel and sudden, may false winds blow in all thy thoughts false as those, thou
told'st the Story of thy love in to me, too, too Credulous Fool, may storms of
doubts and fears still afflict him, and distract his soul, as he has done mine,
by a low mean Jealousy, which has rendered me Justly despised, for having so
partially preferred Lucius before the world; Amadeo, Orante, all that were
displeased, turn back and see me revenge you on my self, while I confess my
punishment just, though nothing be more unjust, then Lucius to become my
punisher


When your Passion, Madam, will give me leave to speak, I am confident, I shall
make it appear Lucius has no Crime to answer, but what has his Root in Love;
for even Jealousy has been held Loves fruit, and such as even hatred has
relished


Jealousy! Who, that has Honor, can defend him, or his Injuries? Does not the
first word, Jealousy, whispered in a Lovers ear, call his Mistress whore; And
since false Lucius has thus incensed my heart, and forced me to play Ariadne's
part, exposed and left on that barbarous Rock, his Breast, Dyon, shall see me,
with this hair and Eyes, crown some Rival, and shine in another Sphere; for
though it break my heart, I will be revenged to the height; and Lucius shall
see a desparing despised Rival fold this breast in his surpised Arms, and then
his jealous heart will split with rage, and destroy the monster


Well, Madam, I shall take my leave, and hope to find an hour more seasonable,
to deliver my Opinion in; I shall only beg now, that your Highness will not,
in this Passion, take any sudden Resolution, lest your Repentance come too late


O Calis, had thou come sooner thou might have been a Witness, and a Judge
of the Cause, as well as a Partaker of the Rage I am in. Lucius has, by Dyon,
sent me such a remedy for Love: Would thou believe his poor heart should avow
a Jealousy for the Prince, and accuse me, as if my heart were a Common Inn,
for every wandering Lover to bait at


'Twas my fear his old disease had seized him; But what can he say?


All that his malice and his anger prompts him to; But how false, Heaven and
Calis can witness; Ambition, Covetousness, Vanity; All that is ill his
Injurious soul has thrown upon me; If ambition could have tempted me with her
false light, How came Valerius to go single hence, whose birth and Fortunes
were swelled with the favor of two Kings, and in his power the disposing of
all Honors, and all preferments of three rich Nations flowing with peace;
himself too a man made up of all the Gods: yet these and him I looked upon with
Indifference


Your Highness was not born to woo.


No, Calis; and therefore Valerius had only a Courtesy for a leg; and this
false man knows, 'twas neither Ambition, Beauty or Fortune, I loved, But Love;
If valor could have conquered, why did Polydor sigh? If Courage would have
forced my heart, it had been his, for there was a quiet Courage, and conquest
without noise, an humble meek valor waited on Polydor; why Jealous then? Fool,
Fool; If Beauty could have charmed me, thou might have feared Thersis; for
sure he would have been the business of my mind, before the world, Thersis must
have been preferred, where beauty can take place, for there was beauty in all
her choicest dress; Manly negligence, unthought of graces, sweetness and
softness in every look, no Art, all careless, natural and unaffected sweetness,
yet graceful and pleasant in every motion; a harmony in his whole form, with a
kind languishing modesty in his eyes, that could he have loved, he promised
such a nature as must have won; if Thersis would have played these Cards he
could not lose; but 'twas no reason lookers on should win the stake they durst
not venture for; and if not of Thersis, why jealous? Fool, fool


Alas, Madam, nor these, nor Turnus with his Voice nor Harp that charmed the
world, could fetter your great mind. This I have heard him say, with vanity, in
his joy


No Calis, his heart knows 'twas not these in all their glories could prevail;
nor one made up of all these could make me stoop; all these without love,
though I value them, I will not sacrifice my freedom to; why then jealous?
Fool, fool. O Calis, if Lucius had not pretended other title to my heart, I had
not now been miserable; 'twas love, Calis, well dissembled love, which in a
bleeding passion armed Lucius; in silent tears he has assailed my heart,
Lucius, that durst fight, kneeled, weeping at my feet; Lucius that had wit and
honor, stood dumb, not able to speak sense, but stammer'd out his story, while
his breast swelled with love and fear; as if his kind heart were grown too big
for his breast, and too little for his love; when I saw that, I had no power to
resist the storm; but striking all my sails submitted my Resolution and my
Reason to his grief; and to cure his despair have made my self thus desperate;
for then, me thought love had raised that storm; me thoughts I saw his painted
wings wet with his tears, and scorched with his sighs, and love sure was moving
in that storm; nay, that storm was Love it self. O Calis, that shaking, that
dumbness, those tears, his Quiver, Bow and Arrows are not more his characters,
then they (when they are true) but these were dissembled all; and my revenge
shall be as curious now, as my love was then, which I will take at height;
follow Calis, and be a witness of that as thou have been of my love and
injuries; no words; By thy friendship, I conjure thee, no dispute; for I am
resolved


VIctory has undone us, and now our slaves lead us in triumph, and every
passion commands Manlius, to whom this fatal peace has proved far more fierce
then war, while lust fired by beauty burnt at every eye, and made slaves of
virtue, honor, and all that is precious, till thy kindness, gentle Calis,
restored to my heart her peace again; without thy friendship, my despair had
run to his old remedy, wounds; for know, this breast is so used to them, it is
scarce well but when it is wounded; 'twas foul blood that made this war in my
heart; dear, let me ease it of that dangerous guest, lest it put me upon some
new horrid crime


Manlius is so severe against himself for one fault, which I know he cannot so
soon repent as the Princess can forgive; for she yet loves Manlius as part of
Lucius; whose guilt is so unpardonable, as if not suddenly redeemed, I fear a
danger not to be resisted; but I am now in haste, and cannot stay to tell you
my fears (though it shall be my business to provide against it) because the
Princess stays for me; but to morrow I will not fail to bring her hither, as
soon as the chase is up; till when lie quiet, and leave the rest to me


With what brow shall I see her, having confessed my sin to the Prince and my
Brother? which she had concealed; her goodness still exceeds our guilt, which
makes my crime more monstrous, and I that am to leave soliciting my love, find
hourly greatness of mind, and new virtues to build upon; and what at first was
passion and lust she has digested into Reason, Love and Adoration; what then
rests for me to pay that debt I owe my friend


Let me see Manlius reconciled to himself, and honor once possess his place
again, and I shall find a thousand ways to be happy in my friendship; nor is
the Princess so poor in virtue, but she can pay her debts to Lucius, and yet
reserve an Alms for Manlius; I heard her once confess your speech had such a
wild boldness in it she took it rather for madness then love; and it bred her
pity, rather then anger, your friends too plead with her; and though she will
not chide for that sudden fact committed by chance, yet take heed of falling
into the fit again; 'twill then be looked upon as a disease in Manlius; and
what is mercy now, to pass by, then her honor and justice will both be engaged
to punish


I am resolved, for now I dare dye again; 'twill be always in my choice to dye
fit for her pity when I cannot live fit for her friendship; and having such a
guide as Calis my heart will find the path it lost, and stray no more at this
sad rate; Good gods, how do they do that are villains always! I have been one
but some few days, but would not continue so; I would live a Dog first


Farewell, all peace rest with my friend; this resistance, this return shows
his virtues never to have been tempted; never to have fallen speaks only happy
stars, no tried virtue; to resist the temptation is worth the name of Manlius,
to have brought back such a servant as Manlius, gone astray from honor, whose
peace of mind is my reward


I will not promise, till my heart be purged by confession of her faults, and
beautified by the Princesses Pardon; but then, if the ever noble Calis would
accept of such a present as Manlius friend, Death only shall make him leave to
serve her


No more; when Manlius is least himself he was then a blessing Calis prayed
for; and 'twas happy for me that he fell from that height of honor, since this
fall has made him mine; if he had not lost some of his pride and value, I fear
he would have joined with the world in opinion that he was too great a blessing
for Calis; yet I kept my friendship perfect, and kinder stars have blessed my
love, whose humble wings never durst, till he was faulty, hope to reach his
heart, and this fiery trial has but purified, not stained my friend, whom all
the gods protect


If your leisure could stay to hear me, I would chide Calis for descending so
low as to value such a wretch as Manlius before her own virtue; but I shall
look upon all these kind thoughts, as so many links to the chain she has laid
upon my heart, which by a faithful, grateful, and eternal friendship, shall
make me esteem my self her slave whose honor and kindness has redeemed me


No more, no more; -- Calis is too happy here; tomorrow, if heaven say Amen, I
will find you, and bring the Princess with


Ha! Manlius a Rival too, and the foolish Calis believes he can forsake Cicilia
for her, when honor and a Brothers interest could not bind him; does she think
her foolish Chains and Bracelets can bind his rough mind when lust and rage has
blown his blood to such a height that the reverence and beauty of the Princess
could not hold him in the bounds of his respects? but why do I trouble my self
with this, since it is a chance has done more for me then all I could have
designed; the Princess will be here alone, to morrow


And shall she go again? if she do, I would Orante were in his grave; Death,
Sir, do something, to vex that cursed brood; since she will not have your love,
take her honor, and please her in spite of her teeth, and then you shall see
all her Lovers stare upon each other, and pass by her as if she were stinking
fish, and I dye laughing to see that proud fool of fortune vexed to death;
'twould be a full revenge on Amadeo, and Otho too, that insolent Roman; then
Lucius, how he would storm! God's Death, do it, or let me do it, and do you look
on; we can escape in this disguise, the act once done, by flying to our own
shapes again


I love her yet enough to be pleased in the act; and I have hate enough to take
pleasure in vexing her, the revenge will be high too


She will come alone too; God's Death, it is such an occasion; if we had designed a
revenge we could not have hoped it; and if you let it pass when your pleasure
and your anger both prompt you, I shall never blame Otho for despising you, for
I shall do it my self; the thought affects me, 'twill so vex her soul to have
the crooked, ugly, despised, lame Orante enjoy her, without making an excuse,
and pluck that fruit her pride has let Princes sue for upon their knees; I
would do it too, in this old woman's habit, while we persuade her 'twas the
Devil in a Witches shape; you shall not be seen till we have bound her; why do
you study? Is there any thing in our fortune or danger worth Orante's thoughts?
is not death after this revenge better then to live deposed and despised


It is decreed; hence Love, all thy charms thus I blow away; and a thousand
thanks, kind Turnus, for awaking my heart from that sleepy coldness that has
slaved it thus long, the mischief will be more then the pleasure pleasing; and
to enjoy her, and despise her, full revenge for her past scorn, and
satisfaction for my despised love; in her Rape both my blood and mind will
taste their several sweets; love in lawful bed might have found one pleasure;
but now my revenge will have her share too; this stroke strikes all at once,
Father, Brother, Rivals; the whole Nation are wounded in it, who in their women
are more concerned then in their gods


And, which adds more to the pleasure, she that would have satisfied any Lover
rather then Orante shall taste no other man


No, Turnus, nor live (if this Dagger hold his temper) to distinguish betwixt
Orante's kisses and Lucius's


If she be of the true Roman breed you may spare your pains; for Cicilia will
find a Dagger of her own, while Tarquin Orante, in the old woman's habit, laughs
unseen


First we must kill Manlius, lest he play some pranks, and hinder our design.


That shall be my business, as soon as it is dark, I know his Quarter; let us
lose no time, but call our friends together, for tomorrow will be quickly here


YOur pardon, Madam, for this intrusion, which, but upon this occasion, I
should not have committed; my Brother being to take his leave, if not
troublesome, would say: something of his own griefs; whose sad story I fear I
may spoil in the delivery


It Is little, Madam, I have to say; your pardon for having said I loved, and
leave to love you still; your pity and your justice, for a passion most
reasonable, because 'twas of an object most divine, is what I now shall beg;
nor can you with justice punish me for what has honor to justify it self
with, when it shall be a crime to love the Princess Cicilia as Amadeo does,
without desiring her to be unjust to her self, without taking one favor from
him that has so highly deserved above me: for I shall not be so partial to my
self, as to question the judgment of your choice; yet thus much I may say, my
heart has never lost one grain of that honor 'twas born to, nor one spark of
that fire it first took at Cicilia's eyes; Absence, time, nor War, no, not
Cicilia's love to another, could change my heart; though rigid honor made me
once fly from her, yet that love and honor both now have called me back; and
again send me from this Paradise to eternal misery. This Riddle, Madam, those
Tyrants will read best to your mind


That you could know my fate, Sir, and I not tell it you! you will find me so
miserable, I can neither be happy, nor make you so; yet time will justify me
to the Prince, by giving him un-imagined reasons of my misfortunes. I know
your Highness will when you are gone, at least, inquire after Cicilia, if then;
I do not let you see Lucius had only my passion, and Prince Amadeo my reason,
then let him condemn me; and at such a rate I will punish my rash heart for
giving it self away upon so little trial, as even your self shall pity me; and
when I lose that esteem for your Highness virtue that a gallant man can pretend
to, and not lose his value of me, then let all the world despise me, more I
cannot say; all that I can give with honor, take


He that desires more must not have such an object as your Highness, nor such a
subject as Amadeo's heart to work upon; who now without envy looks upon Lucius
and his fortune. For heaven witness, I have all the ends my heart desires in
the friendship of the fair Cicilia


Stay here, till I find the Princess; Remember you observe my counsel, let her
passion pass; answer little, defend nothing, for your fault is not to be
justified; besides, I know when you are silent her anger will want what to say;
but from your answer she will still gather substance to express her
displeasure, which is such as I fear you will scarce excuse, especially since
your last madness; what made you send Dyon to her with that ridiculous Message
which has almost distracted her


What is past is not to be remedied; 'twas Lysander told me she gave the Prince
a visit since we fought; and that Amadeo and Clorinda are never from her, which
being my enemies, and she knowing their design upon her, and my relation to
her, methinks, till my return it would not have been unreasonable to have
expected she should have kept a distance with my Rival, and my Enemies. -- Hah!
see where they are, and Amadeo on his knees Calis, Calis, she is false, she is
false, she is perjured; trust the Wind, or Sea as, soon as any woman; what can
she say now, let it be chance or design in both, she is false, Cicilia's false


Stay, you are mad; what should this mean? his rage is beyond counsel; this
accident is beyond my guess


Ha! what voice was that?


A lying one, and a Traitors 'twas, whoever he be that spoke it; and if he
escape me, Fortune shall do more for him then justice dares do for me


Stay, Sir, give me leave to speak before your anger take its course.


Hold, Sir; whoever he be, he is not worth your sword; for this scandal; till
tomorrow, Madam, I must desire your pardon for parting thus abruptly. -- Calis,
a word


'Twas Lucius's voice.


I knew that, but was loath to grieve her heart with telling her so.


You must expect his fury should discharge it self upon you; therefore be so
just to the Princess, as calmly to tell him his error; and upon how
unreasonable grounds he builds his jealousy, this will confirm what you have
said to her; for every fault Lucius commits her kindness makes heavy to her;
and what ere you may believe, let him be never so guilty, she will not love his
punisher; for to make his faults public by Amadeo, is to upbraid her; and if
you would destroy a Rival more gracious then your self, wisely see, and seem to
hide his faults; then all your gallantry is his poison, and obligations upon
her; I would not now fight with him till he struck me; and that patience shall
win more from a generous heart, like hers, then thou can possibly reap with
thy sword; for she and all the world knows, it is not fear of Lucius but love to
Cicilia makes Amadeo spare even his enemy, because she loves him


Dear Clorinda, from love and thee I have learned two hard lessons; it is to
stoop to Love and Anger; and I shall only expect what he will do, and resolve
in order to thy counsel; I confess, I now begin to pity him, even my self that
was this morning his enemy; sure Fortune begins to frown upon him, there was
strange malice in this chance, to bring him to see that only which must vex him


TOmorrow they hunt in the Forest; I will meet him, and in this disguise take
my revenge; if he escape me, let him take her for whom I scorn to fight; but
that I hate him more then I love her; besides, I know it will strike her soul to
have him fall by me, and to see him killed for whom she broke her faith; this
revenge will render her despised, having neither Honor nor a Lover left


O Calis, how vain are our thoughts, how endless those desires that rule our
hearts! Lucius his jealousy has so humbled my heart, so discouraged me in the
pursuit of happiness, that my soul is grown desperate; it is vanity for any Maid
to hope by Reason, or Virtue, to tie any man to her friendship; the blind
pursuit of some, may by chance some minutes be happy; But no Rule can prescribe
a certain way to make a Lover happy; Now I find, it had been better far for me
to have had a nature like other common women, with a mind easily satisfied, and
in a modest Ignorance have believed all that their false Sex said, and have
taken what my fate would have sent me, then to labor the knowledge of the best
minds, and, with a sweet Vexation, make my self fit for such as I cannot find,
so to be only more miserable then other Women; for they in their folly gain
that bliss I in my dreams have only found, and not knowing better enjoy all
their wishes, living contented, and dying loving, and lamented, whilst I in
pain languish, having lost that pride and value of my self which Lucius once
begot; But 'twas flattery all; I am not fair nor virtuous sure; There is no
Magic in this Form, as that dissembler swore; Else were those graces here, how
came Lucius to despise me? Had I virtue, how durst that dissembler doubt my
honor? O Calis, this scorn has robbed me of all my Friendship, I have scarce
enough left to protect my breast against my own hands, which hate the heart
that this false youth has wounded; Therefore no more, no more, I know 'twas he,
and I am resolved; and since Calis has sworn to be secret, she shall now know
my design


Madam, I was never so much Lucius's as to abandon your Highness, for him; when
I can serve him without prejudice of my Faith, I shall do it, in memory that he
was once your friend


That Idle thought is past and gone, my anger is resolved into Reason; yet his
Injuries are such, that I can calmly tell thee, thou might as soon reconcile
that Eternal Quarrel betwixt death and Nature, as Lucius and my heart. His
jealousy has committed such low sins; I wonder he is not ashamed to converse
with such mean thoughts; and I hate my self, to think I was such a fool as to
let it be twice in Lucius his power to Injure me; But, from this hour, all the
memory I shall retain of such a Crime as his Friendship, shall be to show him I
am Innocent when his Repentance shall come too late


I hear, and grieve to hear, (You are both Subject to passion) and your
miseries are like to be as great as your hearts; And though I dare say, neither
of you love any thing better then each other, Yet that Love is like to be a
fatal Enemy; for your Anger and displeasure is as high as his Jealousy and
Rage; No one of you having patience to defer your Anger, or Revenge, till you
see each other; This wild Justice, which both pursue thus passionately, I fear
you and all that love you may repent too late


That Is my hope, and my design, that misery is now my souls wish, for you know
I am Innocent; But since Lucius can doubt my Honor twice, and not speak to me
once, he shall never be satisfied by Cicilia but when it must breed his
despair, which shall only find him when I am out of possibility to redeem him.
For know, my soul is resolved to Morrow to find his Rival, and give him all the
Joys I had laid up in store for Lucius; Though it break my heart, I will do it;
which I know 'twill do, when I shall find my self embraced by his Rival. This
(Calis) is the Revenge I will take upon his Jealous Soul; and, if he love,
'twill wound him more then his own Dagger; For to a Lover it must be perfect
misery, to see his Mistress condemned to a loathed Bed


Heaven forbid -- upon my knees, Madam, I beg, you Amadeo, though in your
lawful Bed, can preserve your Highness from the Censure of the world. In this
Action you will lose many grains of Honor; for though the Prince weigh down
Lucius, yet Lucius had your Faith


Amadeo? No, Calis; Prince Amadeo is as far distant from his hope, as Lucius.


Not Amadeo? Heaven guard my poor heart; If Manlius be the man, I am lost; for
I cannot with honor hinder his hopes; what shall I believe


When saw you Manlius?


Ha! Now, Manlius, thou shall find I love thee above my self. Lately, Madam,
and a sad penitent for his Crimes; Is there no hope his repentance may find
your pardon; are his faults allied to Lucius? I hope they are, else Calis is
miserable


No, fears, Calis; my Intent is to punish the faults in one brother, not to
encourage them in the other; and my fate guides me to a Revenge on Lucius, not
Calis that is my friend


Then the gods are favorable to Prince Amadeo.


No, Calis; Prince Amadeo has too many virtues to make me happy, as Lucius has
too few; and 'twill be as great a dishonor for Cicilia to marry the Prince, as
it is virtue in me to renounce Lucius


Too many virtues? Heaven bless me, what fine points do we propose to make our
selves miserable! too much honor, and too many virtues, to become Cicilia's
Hymen's; this is a Riddle I understand not


To be revenged, and save mine honor, is now my business; not to give my fame
to punish Lucius; Can you persuade the world that I left Lucius, and resolved
to punish my self for his Crimes, when they see me married to Amadeo? A man
that is made up of all that is Excellent, Great, or Honorable? one that might
Justify a Maid, even in the breach of Faith? should I marry him, 'twould make
the guilty Lucius Innocent; and Innocent Cicilia as black in story as jealous
Lucius shall be; for who will stick to say, when we are married, Lucius then
was Jealous upon too sad a ground? No, Calis, having practiced and known the
virtues of Amadeo, I confess, my heart told me he was a Subject fit for any
Lovers fear, where he would become a Rival; Therefore betimes, to prevent such
a danger as Lucius his Jealousy, you can witness I gave Lucius my vows and
faith, before the gods and thee; And after that, to have him doubt, and not
only fear, but call me false, robbing me of that honor, and good Name, which
with his life he should have defended, making himself those scandalls a Gallant
man would have stabbed, or strangled in the bosom of a Brother? But Lucius is
false; it is not a kind fear which all that Love must have; but a mean
jealousy, which does not only make me unfit for his Friendship, but the
esteem of all gallant men; This is his Crime, which Lucius may live to repent


If not Amadeo, what rests then, where is the Rival?


Orante.


Orante, what of him?


To that wretched Creature Fortune has reserved Cicilia, not for his good, nor
that she owed him a blessing; But for my Curse, my Affliction; To that wretch I
will give my self; To him my vows of faith, if he will receive me, are now
designed


Orante! Heaven forbid.


Yes, Calis, I will marry Orante, not withstanding thy wonder, and all the
worlds, and having vowed to him pay him a faith as just and observant as Lucius
should have had; And that false man shall see, honor obliges me as much to
that wretch as love should have done to him; This way, Calis, thou shall see
thy friend revenged, and the world shall justify me, and say, Lucius was
jealous without a Cause; for sure Orante is a Subject few or none will believe
I should break my faith for; and when Lucius shall see him possessed of what he
loved, the vexation that his heart must feel will be my Revenge


But will your Highness, in a Passion, destroy your self, and punish all that
love you because one has been false? Did you love nothing but Lucius? What have
we that are your friends done? that you should afflict us thus, to see you make
your self miserable beyond Redemption? sure you never loved Lucius


Yes, Calis, and 'twas my Crime; for I have loved and obliged him beyond his
hopes, beyond reason or Justice, preferred him before a gallanter man then
himself; you know I loved him, First, for his fears, and they were lovely then,
and his doubts as obliging as his jealousy injurious now; And this Act will
let him see I never loved any thing but Lucius


But suppose Lucius despise you for this Act.


Why then I will suffer for having loved one so unworthy.


If Lucius his faults had not their Roots in Love and jealousy I should not
defend him; methinks I should love him more for doubting his fortune, then for
a saucy confidence of me, till I was his; There must be something, Madam, of
the vain and insolent, that pretend to love, and woo without fear, or doubt;
Rage in a Lover I should take for Love it self; If Lucius had loved another,
then a high Revenge were due; But all your anger strives to punish him for
loving you; suppose a friend falls, suppose he goes astray, suppose he be sick,
shall we then be angry? one of these is Lucius his case


This I know, and that Orante's body is furnished with a mind more mishap'd;
one that will omit no means to gain his ends; one whose Lust prevails with him
more then Honor or Conscience, which beast in the mind adds even to his
deformity, and has bred such an invincible hatred against me; Yet now I will
stoop even to that hate, and suffer my self to be miserable beyond example; My
time will be the shorter to outlive the injuries of so false a man as Lucius


But what have we that are your friends, or Prince Amadeo done, that you should
punish us


I have said Prince Amadeo has too many Virtues; and could I love again he were
the man; This I said when I thought my self happiest, else I should not say it
now; This I said, when I refused Amadeo, else I should not say it now when
Lucius has refused me; And when thou see him tell him this story, he will
hate Lucius, and pity me, who will punish my self and become fit for his pity,
for not having been wise enough to preserve my self fit for his Love, of which
crime Lucius was the original guilt


Can you forgive Orante all his deformities, all the sins and wickednesses that
are natural to him, and marry what you have ever loathed, and not forgive
Lucius that loves you, Lucius that you have loved, one fault, one crime? A sin
yet to be disputed, whether it be so in Love or no; for Jealousy was once
Love, Jealousy in the root none doubts is Love; It Is true, what the fruit may
be is doubtful; But Lucius his Jealousy yet has only born unhandsome fears,
passionate choleric words


O Calis, thou art yet to seek what abused Love is, thy Fortune was kind by
chance, that made thee always love unbeloved again; But when thou shall be
sought to by diverse Gallant Men, till thy free Heart fix on one whom thy
kindness will oblige above the world; When neither Honor, Person, nor parts
could tempt thee; when, like me, thou shall have loved for Love only; then to
find thy self deceived, suspected, injured, and despised by him for whom thy
partial kindness has thus made war against the world, as I have done for
Lucius, then thy Honor will fire thy Heart; and rather then not be revenged,
like me, strike through thy own Breast rather then let such a sin pass
unpunished; Disdain and Scorn will rise in the face of Love, when thou shall
see thy faith and kindness accused for false by one that begged at thy feet
till his false tears had gained thy Charity; And now the saucy Beggar will
proportion and give Rules to my Bounty, and confine that Honor, that pity,
that kindness, that from a Beggar, made him Master of my Heart; This
ungrateful, dissembling, insolent, jealous, injurious Lover, is Lucius; and I
by my Folly made so miserable, as to find a pleasure in being revenged on the
thing I loved; which design to morrow I will pursue: And, by all thy Friendship
I conjure thee, plead no more against my Resolution; But, in order to thy Oath,
prepare for to morrow; and when the chase is up we may avoid the company and
retire to some place, to put on that disguise which I have already furnished,
till when Farewell. --


Something I must do to prevent this mischief; when she has spoke with Manlius
the occasion will be fit; and to morrow, when we return to put on our disguise,
I will lead her as by chance into Juno's grove, 'twill be proper to conceal
her; And those sacred limits will afford a privacy fit to reconcile us; which
being once done, I will break all vows rather then see her throw her self into
the loathed embraces of Orante, though I will not now oppose her Passion


THis time has been so full of Tempests, Madam, the storm would scarce give
Loves gentle wings leave to fly in the Court; Jealousy and foolish Passion,
those Birds of prey, still stooping at his Mothers Doves; And here, where Love
should be heard sing, mutinous war has given our Hearts more Alarms then the
Camp; But now these troubles are blown over, I shall hope it is not unseasonable
to invite the Prince to honor our Hymen's with his presence


Amadeo is yet all the staff Clorinda can in Honor lean upon; and I hope he
will not refuse this hand now, when I am to walk in paths so strange to
Clorinda as Hymen leads to; For though Otho had my hand to be his Bride, yet
Amadeo most not be forgot, that has always been kind as a Lover, faithful as a
Brother; And 'twill show a kind of insensibleness in me to desire his stay,
only to add to this affliction by seeing others happy, and then to begin his
misery; Nor would I punish Otho for others faults, by delaying his rights,
which I confess are due; This straight your kindness must lead me through


SOftly, and follow me; now you have seen him make ready; The first that meets
him shoot. Saw you the Prince Orante


Not since he went to the Hermit's; It Is late, I wonder they stay thus long.


Stand close, I hear some body coming.


Be ready, he comes.


Away then, we will follow you.


MY Brother at your Hermitage?


Yes, and Calis with him; They are now gone to walk in the Grove, they have
some design to morrow, I heard them appoint it; This path will bring us to him;
and I am confident when you see him you cannot but pity him; So sad, and so
dejected a Mind I never saw, yet I have concealed him all I can


His poor mean Treachery was the first step to my misery; Had he been true to
either of us, Amadeo had not lived to have acted, or Lucius suff'red a second
Injury: And all the ties of Brother can scarce forget his Crime, though I know
he hates himself for it


'Twill be Charity at least to reconcile your self to him.


His Injuries are yet too fresh; pray let a day or to pass, and then we will
meet at your Cell and embrace; till then, no words of my being here: The Sun is
low, and I will retire to your Brothers Hermitage


THe Repentance of this Crime has brought a quiet and a calmness over my Mind;
Anger, Jealousy, nor Lust have no longer power over me. One good Resolution
has dispersed them all; I am now Master of my self again, and can with the
world see and admire that Star without Ambition of plucking it from Heaven, and
aspiring to its place; I could find Lucius, and kiss his feet, ask him pardon,
and rejoice to see him possess the blessing I have lost, and, without Envy,
hear him call the Divine Cicilia his; This storm has made the Harbor sweet; I
had such perpetual quiet, such constant happiness, before I knew not the value
of it. This Affliction wak'ned me; and if to morrow be fortunate in the
Princesses Pardon, all the rest of my days will be full of Joy and Calis
Friendship


Away, I hear company, leave him. --


Oh my Fate! this is sad to die I know neither how, nor why, and fall ere I
have made my Peace with the Princess; a fullen Fate has prevented me to be
grateful to Calis


'Twas a shoot.


'Twas so, and in this place, What might it mean?


Hark, I hear some body groan.


Ha! your Brother lies murdered, Manlius; Sir, it is your Brother calls, he
faints, give him air


Quickly find his wounds that we may bind them; then


Trouble not your self with that; if his wounds be not mortal, I have a Balsam
will give him a sudden remedy


While you attend this Cure I will find the Murderer, he cannot be far.


Help me to convey his body to the Cell.


Poor Manlius, thou art my Brother still, for all thy Crimes. --


SO, this is past, and we are far enough from search; this poor habit will
secure us; yet it is good to be privately armed, lest any suspicion find us


To night he cannot be found in that unfrequented place, and our business will
be done early in the Morning


Where shall we expect her?


Upon the entrance into the wood, where we can stand and see them undiscovered;
when they are entered seize and bind them, and convey them to Juno's Grove,
whose privacy will be fit for our design; For being sacred to the Roman
Deities, none will come there to disturb us: The Act once done, you may resolve
to quit this shape and stay; or protected by your disguise thus escape


I am not satisfied with your leaving Manlius: The fellow says he was not
dead, and believes his wounds but slight


Slight? A shot and two thrusts, that you may see through him; if he licks them
whole time enough to hurt us, I would have the Praetor keep him to lick the
Army, instead of leading them, he will heal them as soon as a Charm; Besides, I
have no Malice to him, he was always a good plain fighting fellow, that would
never talk much; one that when he was outwitted would repair to his hand
still, and use his cold Iron as his last Argument: I have seen him so beat a
better wit then himself, for disputing with him beyond his Reason, that he
could have wished himself a fool to have been out of his hands: Besides, he is
none of our Enemy in this quarrel; Alas, he is as angry as we, a poor despised
Lover, and mutinies against Prince and Brother; He is a lame Cripple of Cupids,
that has both the blind ones against him; Love and Fortune are both his
Enemies, and a Man need no more affliction in this world then to be in Love,
and have those two declare against him


Let us not part to night, that we may be sure to attend our design to morrow.
--


THe Princes are both in their Chambers, and now a making ready for the Chase.


But Manlius is missing, and Lucius though banished, is not far off; His Peace
is made by the generous Prince Amadeo, and was for certain, last night, at the
Gardiners little house in the Grove; Calis confesses she brought him thither,
and that he flew from her in a Rage when he saw the Prince Amadeo taking his
leave of the Princess Cicilia, and mistook their parting for a conclusion of
what his jealousy has apprehended; This, if you meet him, you are to assure
him of from Calis and my self, that his mind may find some peace; Let us divide
our selves, he was seen to enter this wood, and his Horse was taken up this
Morning loose; I will take this path, and we will meet in the place where the
Hounds are uncoupled; Let not the Praetor know he is hereabouts, till we have
spoken with him


I shall observe; but if there were no other way to women then these Princes
find Lysander would curse his Stars; Do thou think there is so much to boot
betwixt a woman and a woman as these foxes pretend? If there be, I thank the
Gods for my ignorance, that understand not the difference of the commodity in
my practice; Sweet, and young, and kind, if sound, goes far, and when they
were alone they would all hear Reason that I have had to do with: But here is
such fighting, and sighing, such hunting and losing, and squatting, starting,
and turning of a Coney, such erring, swearing and staring, and Puss is as angry
as any of the kennel of Madmen that hunt her. Are all Roman Princesses thus
hard to be caught? Sure he that gets this will not complain she is tough; And
if a hunted Mistress be a good Bedfellow, bid him put this in crust; I warrant
her she will eat short, yet I have heard a Lover say, his Mistress Heart cannot
be too soft, nor her Arse too hard to make a servant good sauce


Beast, such a description I expected from thy Camp, and sucklers observations;
And how many servants does't thou think Gentle-folks can in Honor make happy


In a Day and a Night, how do you mean?


No, no, in all her life, fool?


Why, a Regiment of Horse, and a Brigade of Foot, I dare say, Faustina has past
so many pikes as that comes to; and yet she works for her living, and has no
good convenience to dispatch her business neither; had she time and
opportunities that your idle Ladies throw away; their several rooms, and
loneness when they please; she would have done brave things


If I had malice enough to publish this in the Court, how the women would all
to behang thee for this roguish opinion; why I tell thee, it is sometimes seven
year ere a good sufficient Lover gets leave to kiss his Mistress, and fourteen
ere she kiss him again; but to let two men kiss her, Heresy, and they are
burnt; I never heard of but one that was seduced, or persuaded to that Heresy;
and the Rogue told of her, but no body durst believe him; for the Plague is not
more mortal then such a discovery against a Platonic Lover of this age


And do we take pains to preserve this Race of Fools? prithee, let them find
and kill each other, to the end of the Chapter; God's Death, if my Lady, or her
woman, should deny to do me reason when she had time to answer my Question; By
this hilt I would hide this blade in her belly; A pox of this fooling, Does
your Prince use my Princess so? By this hand, if I did not think he had knocked
her down ere this I would poison him; she is a blade, in faith, Dyon, none of
your no forsooth, none of your whyning no fies: By this hand, if she does not
strike first she has cozened Lysander; hark, I hear the horn sound in the
plain


Farewell then, till the Chase is done; and then I will bring you to Calis, and
she shall make you a Platonic Lover


I will be gelt as soon as be converted by that whyning Broker; she is Cupid's
Baud, and withers in her Petti-coat, for one of those thousand Curt'sies she
has done for others, she loves men for loving other folks, and she has reason;
for unless she mends her face she will scarce do it, for loving her; Calis's
old sayings, and I had as many Maiden-heads as she has brok'd away, I would not
be dis-virginated in a year; she hunts Manlius counter; and if he go on when
will they meet, less in a Comedy? where to see an old reverend Maid that has
sat seven ages in a Court Receiver of Loves Customs, at last, pretend with
Arguments to persuade a Soldier to the love of shadows, Platonique friendship,
'twill be as ridiculous as the Miller that laid the Sack upon his neck, and
then got up to ease his Mare. Farewell, Dyon


NEither this last night, nor this morning, could I find any that I could
suspect for this murder; those were the Keepers, and to them I dare not be
seen; the woods are full of people, sure the Praetor hunts to day


He does so, I spoke with the Master of the Game this morning when they were
pitching of the Toils


I lost my horse last night, and I fear I may be discovered by him; therefore I
will retire; and if you can discover any news in your Cell I will expect you; I
will to my Brother, who since he has rested gives me hope his arm will not
hinder our search in finding out who it was that shot him


I have persuaded him to eat something; fasting and loss of blood are both
dangerous for him; I will mingle my self among the people, and to all but Calis
conceal your abode


Pray do so, and tell her Manlius and my self are reconciled, but mention not
his being hurt


I observe you.


How unreasonable a thing an enraged man is since I have listened to Manlius his
discourse I find the fault my heart has committed against the divine Cicilia
such as I cannot hope for pardon; a fault so great and so unjust I am so far
from believing she will forgive me, I cannot forgive my self; what a fool a
Lover may be? what beast but Lucius could have doubted Cicilia? there is a
folly in jealousy, and a kind of cowardice; I wonder any thing that is man,
and has converst with honor, could let it prevail over his thoughts; there is
nothing so maliciously bent to the destruction of Love and Honor as jealousy;
it strikes at the first blow the root of both honors, the Lovers and the
Loved; it calls her what is not fit to be beloved, and tells her we are
incapable of loving; that low passion calls our selves what we would not hear
another say, nor live with that man that we believe thinks so; Lysander had
reason when he despised my jealousy, because it confessed my Rival deserved
better then my self; else my Mistress is either a fool or false vanity; though
it be poison to love, yet in this case a little is Physic, and allowed to
defend us against the danger of jealousy; all Treacles have some poison, which
like the key open the door to let the Cordial in; vanity in a healthy
proportion, and taken in season, may do our selves justice, and defend our
loves; and Cicilia would sooner have forgiven Lucius a little vanity then this
jealousy; Lucius might have said, what if Amadeo be a Prince, and Lucius a
subject; is not Cicilia a Princess too? and what though the world prefer
Amadeo, she has chosen Lucius; and if I have grace in her eyes, let him be hapy
where he will: what if Amadeo have Otho's consent, while I have Cicilia's
faith? this I ought to have whispered to my soul; and when my fears apprehended
Amadeo's person, or his parts, my thoughts should have prompted me, Cicilia had
honor and friendship for Lucius; and those thoughts would have smothered that
fire which jealous anger bred in my unfortunate breast; and rather have died
then doubted the fair Cicilia, while intemperate love, I fear, has thrown down
the Altar we were so long a building; unless her goodness will still act more
of the Deity then Lucius of the fool or madman


Sir, the Forest is full of people; the Praetor and the stranger Princes are all
abroad; the Game was up, and all men inquired for you and your Brother; your
horse was taken up this morning; I saw the Princess Cicilia, Calis was with
her, they are both sad; it is my opinion you retire till Calis come


I will follow you; men in misfortunes have a large Stage to show themselves
upon; and he that Acts well, be his part never so Tragical, leaves the blame
upon his Stars; I am now engaged, Love and Honor have brought me on; and
though jealousy has made me stray, yet those guides will find the way


IN this disguise I will make my revenge perfect, though my fortune be
miserable; it is not Orante's deformed body, and soul crookeder then his back,
lost his fame, low as his condition, and a nature worse then his fortune, shall
make me change my resolution; to whose loathed embraces I will now fly; yet
here I confess, death's cold lean arms would be welcomer far, could I then see
Lucius miserable; no reply, as thou love me, but haste to the place of our
retreat till this business is over


Stay, fond Girls, and know your fates from me; Weak and poor your designs are;
you may vow to what gods you please; but here in this place you shall find your
Destiny at his utmost date, born to enjoy nothing but what you fear and hate;
sieze upon them


PRithee, Lysander, stay; my heart bodes some ill, there is a heaviness upon it
will not let me enjoy neither the Company nor the sport to day; saw you which
way the Princess Cicilia went


Calis and she entered the Wood but now, and see where their Clothes lie.


Heaven, what may those pretend? Some violence sure,


Undoubted, Thieves would have taken their clothes; see, there is money in
their pockets, and a paper directed to Lucius; hold, Sir, I apprehend from this
paper the Princess has taken some resolution to absent her self from the Court,
to avoid being solicited in your highness behalf; for, faulty as he is, she
loves Lucius


It must be so, let us away, and find the Prince; Bring the clothes, that they
may know the chance, I cannot guess enough to satisfy my troubled mind, my
fears have robbed me of my Reason; See the Prince


What means this?


Here in this place we found them, and this Letter directed to Lucius.


Heaven guard my Child.


All the gods pro tect the Princess.


From all but her own Passion I believe she is safe; but I know her heart is
troubled at Lucius his Jealousy; I fear she has taken some desperate
resolution; Pray, Sir, open that Letterl for I am confident she there tells him
all her thoughts.


Ha, Orante! to find Orante? to give him her vows, and faith for ever, to marry
Orante, to be revenged on Lucius, [all Orante? Read, Read,] my eyes are lost in
tears; Otho, your severity has forced her to this Justification of her love to
Lucius


Away, Sir, let us all divide, and beset the Wood, they cannot escape, it is but
now we parted; for heavens sake disperse, lest the sad delay beget the Curse
she threatens, Orante's bride? a Grave rather, good heaven, theu see her in
that loathed place


If we can find her, Sir, all is safe; I know, she has so much kindness,
honor, and duty, she will not refuse to give up her trouble and passion to
your Authority; I know it is only Melancholy, and displeasure against Lucius;
Which kindness from your Highness will in a little time remove. She still with
tears lamented to me your Highness severity, and that of late the brother was
quite buried in you, and all you said or did was full of the Statesman, and the
Prince, without a thought of her love, nor the least kind sense of her, or her
wishes; and being thus abandoned by a brother, wanting some kind friend, to
lament; to sadness, and grief, having no vent, Lucius his Injuries has made her
take this desperate resolution; and I am glad Calis is with her, a person of
too much honor and discretion to consent to this design, though she may seem
to comply with her passion


However; let us not delay finding of her, and I believe it is fit conceal our
knowledge of this Paper till her mind be quieted


Divide then; Otho, come you along with me.


Lysander, let us take this path. -- No Clorinda, there is Otho is a Prince,
whose friendship no Maid ought to be ashamed of; Be faithful to him and his
fortune, dear Clorinda; Else all the kindness thou stealest from him is not
worth the taking; Love and Honor him next the gods, let Otho possess thy
heart, and then thou art kind to Amadeo


This generosity in Amadeo is more chains then those we load Our Captives with,
and I willingly stoop to him; for it is no dishonor to be overcome by Prince
Amadeo; the great Example of Honor and friendship; But if the unfortunate
Cicilia had not been condemned to misery she might have paid a part of this
Debt; But fate that gave such a Jewel to the world as Clorinda, and Amadeo,
knew too well their Price, and therefore appointed them for fortune, not merit,
to possess


Any time but this my thirsty soul would watch ages to drink the Joy it has, to
hear you vie who should love each other best, while I smile to see how much a
maid out-loves you both; which I do, or my heart deceives me; for I am sure I
would. And what a lover kindly would is to a Lover Current pay; for Love is all
as happy, and as obliging in the will, when it is placed upon a Noble Subject,
as the Act it self; But we lose time, and with that hazard the most precious
things of the Earth; Otho's sister, and Amadeo's Friend, which Title Reason and
her Passion both have given me


In the plains we will meet if we miss them in the Woods.


Haste, Amadeo; a Lovers Eye is as curious in his search as the Cretan hound in
Chase; and my divining soul tells me Amadeo must find her though he lose
himself


O Manlius, the gods then decreed my ruin when they let thee fall from Honor;
Thy wild Injuries distracted me; A Brother and a Friend at once I lost, and at
a time when I had most need of Counsel, Anger having broke her bounds,
despising love and reason; and that hedge thrown down all the ills that
uncollected man is capable of, like weeds, possessed my wild breast, and overran
my mind


I cannot but wonder at your Jealousy for those few days past, when I was so
bold in ill as to tell her my crime; she was then all Lucius's; The gods and my
Brother had only Interest in her heart; Nor can I, in all your discourse,
gather one cause of anger but her silence, that only was her fault; for she
was not in Passion though Lucius was; and therefore her friendship should
calmly have cleared his doubts, and rather have quenched his anger with
kindness then have kindled hers at his passion


No more, dear Manlius; though thou art now my dear Brother, yet from thee my
kindness must not hear the least detracting word, not a thought that tends to
accusing the Princess; It Is the Quarrel I have against my self, which no friend
shall reconcile; I hate Lucius for that sin so much, that thy kindness, which
is now new heat by a happy reconciliation, and would now receive all
impressions from thee easier and readier then before our unkindness; I must not
hear thee speak in that strain: shall I, that would not have heard my bosom
friend say the Princess loved Lucius, endure to hear it told me, she is false?
as if her love had been a Crime or sin, and her falsehood a virtue? No, dear
Manlius, thou can witness, with a Sacred Reverence We held our Loves, till
this fatal Jealousy robbed me of my Reason


Reason had saved us both, But the gods will not let Reason be always in
Season; Men came too near their Deity, did not our Passions master us, could we
keep them tame and low, how quickly our hearts would have found the precipice
we stood upon; When we both made it our business to find arguments to hate what
we loved, and with tongues and words strove to publish to the world that lie
that said Manlius hated Lucius, or Lucius could hate Cicilia


And I, that all my days despised the worlds opinion, and their way of love:
Did we love like the common people? Did we make the world our Judge, or guide
to love by? No, no, nor shall their depraved Customs stand Examples for Lucius
now his Reason is returned. How I will oppose her past favors against my
present fears, and they will defend Lucius; This thought, and such a friend as
Manlius yesterday might have saved me from this misery; He might have told me
how late I came to Court; When love with all his strength had besieged her
heart, youth and beauty, honor and fortune, power and wealth, were there
seconded by all that were famous for Arts or Parts; Thus engaged I found her
heart, yet their Batteries, nor Mines, nor Assaults, nor Intelligence within,
could win the Excellent Cicilia; who, with honor made defense, till Lucius,
(Then too happy Lucius) came and raised the siege; In which he such glory got,
he stood the envy of the gods and men, till this Cursed Jealousy struck him to
the Earth


Had not I been mad too, a friend might have saved us both; a Friend is the
staff and safety of our Peace; he might have said, shall we, when a friend
loses a Limb, or Child, or any other the lesser gifts of Fortune; Or if by
sickness afflicted, will Lucius in these cases be sad, and show an
Extraordinary kindness in Tears, or diligence to give them Comfort; and when
his Mistress has broke her Faith, or lost her Honor, will he then be angry,
and seek a Revenge? how unreasonable were such an Action, to add his
afflictions to the shame and trouble of her mind; her guilt would be load
enough without thy hatred or thy anger; sooner fatal wounds should let out my
life, to banish from her sight an Object that upbraids her, e're I reviled the
name I loved; such a hate declares 'twas self-love, else thou would pity her
now; and in this sickness of her mind, at all rates of mercy and kindness,
compass her peace; such a generous silence, and handsome bearing of her
Injuries would speak thy love to her; and who knows what such a Cordial may
work upon the most desperate disease that love is subject to, and restore her
heart, or at least pay that debt Lucius owes her, whose mercy could not see him
sad, but at the rate of her self once bought his Peace


O Manlius, chide me still, chide me, till my blushing soul has with shame and
hatred of my self expiated my guilt


Hark, Sir, the Noise of people draws this way, pray let us retire; and if
Calis can prevail with the Princess, here you may find an unexpected blessing,
for she has promised me as soon as they can lose the Company, to guide her, as
if 'twere by chance, to this place, to beg her pardon for that fault which you
must both forgive; But I would not have her see you, till Calis be acquainted
with with your being here; Hark, they draw near, pray let us retire


O Calis, it is Orante, I know his voice through his disguise.


It Is so.


Yes, it is Orante, That Orante your scorn and Malice so lively described even
now; But thy knowledge of him will cost thee dear; for when I have took my
pleasure of thee prepare to die, I will try if your Curious Lover can find by
those steps which my Lust shall leave on thy proud Body, who it was trod down
thy Virgin Flower; Know fond woman, thy scorn has made me hide self in a
thousand shapes; But to take a full Revenge, which I now shall do, by thine own
folly; This Occasion Calis gave me; for which Manlius shall thank her; for know
('twice betrayed) thou art come hither to meet the lust of Manlius, who here
was appointed to expect thee; But that danger my Interest, not hate to him, nor
kindness to thee, has removed; And when those Soldiers have entertained
themselves with Calis, they will show her where she may busy her self with
burying of him


O monster, unheard of Villainy!


It Is high revenge to vex you, and to have in my power to force what your scorn
would not give; and now know, all the Treasure that the Earth has shown, or
hid; All that Treason has bought or Sold; All that the Sword has won or lost;
All that Love has given, or lust has cost, shall not buy from me this Revenge;
Turnus, bind her, and then leave us


Calis, O Heaven, do thou see this, and not protect the Innocent?


How sweet this Rose smells; Much more Honey is there in this Nectar, then in
that Jove drinks; Dispatch, Turnus, that my soul may be drunk with Beauty and
Revenge; Let Heaven frown another Age upon Orante, if Fortune would but give
him such another Revenge


They are tongue-ty'd already.


Dumb, Cicilia? How their Hearts swell, now they play Orantes part, her Heart
would burst now to be revenged; This is that pastime your scorn used to take
upon Orante; Come dispatch, no resistance. -- A Bracelet of this Orante now
might wear without Lucius and Amadeo would be jealous


Ye Gods, what words can express this villainy! what voice can speak the
Injuries and Rage my Soul suffers! Heaven in Thunder tell this monster what I
designed for him; and then to punish that crime save but my Honor, and let thy
lightning strike him through this unfortunate breast.


S' death, I think they have gotten men's minds and strength with their
breeches; A Jury that should condemn your Highness of a Rape upon either of
these two alone, ought to be hanged themselves for false Rogues; 'Twere an even
lay a Jury did not do it; S' death, she bites, and scratches, hold her hands, a
pox. -- S' death, you whore, had it been a little higher it had sped my plough:
What shall we do now? she will be mischievous. --


Hell upon it, kill her, and I will enjoy her while she is warm; any thing
rather then let her have her sullen will to die a Maid, and rob me of my
Revenge


Hold, Villain, till I have spoke, and then do what Hell and thou shall decree;
for having thus secured my Honor from thy force I can smile on death. From my
last words take this truth, and believe me; though thou hate me, I am not so
wicked voluntarily to go to my grave with an useless lie in my mouth; Stir not,
leave that vain thought that bids you hope to disarm me; for know, though this
dagger and a feeble arm be not able to defend Cicilia; Yet she has Honor
enough to defend her Honor, and kill Cicicilia, which I shall do upon the
first step that moves this way. Know then, thou have prevented thy own Fortune,
for witness Heaven, (to which thou have now forced me take a hasty journey) my
business and this disguise was to find an occasion to give my self to Orante
for a Bride, if he would have received me


Ha! it cannot be, this lie will not save you.


No, monster, it is so much truth I will not be saved; for I confess, I ought to
die for having so base a thought; Yet because thou shall believe what I say,
thou owe me nothing for that desire; for had Lucius been worth the having, ^^
Cicilia worth the presenting to generous Amadeo, Orante should never have had
her; whom my Soul feared and loathed, and my Heart divining some horrid villainy
from thee, has always trembled at thy Name; and but to punish my self and
jealous Lucius, Orante had sunk unthought of


Riddles, by Heaven Riddles; But I shall find an Oedipus to read them.


No monster, the truth is too sad; And had thou been a Man of Honor, and fit
for any Hymen's but one enraged and blind with Passion, Amadeo had this day been
happy; But his Honor made him unhappy, having as much nobleness more then
weight, as thy base mind was poor and destitute of good


It Is truth she tells thee, and now I defy thee. This kind Remedy Heaven has
sent me against all my past miseries; And thy horrid intents are the loud
calls, the Gods have used to bid me make haste to them; and if thou movest one
step this way, thus I go


Shall foolish fear or pity make me afraid to embrace or enjoy Cicilia? Fond
Girl, do thou believe I will lose thee when there is only the difficulty of
a dagger betwixt us? No, proud fair one, thou art mine in the spite of Fate;
even in thy dying groans, it is decreed, I will enjoy thee. --


Help, Rape, Murder, Treason, help, Murder, Treason, Rape, help for Heavens
sake, Treason, Treason, O horrid Villains! --


Stop her mouth. --


Hold your prating, or I shall cut your wezill.


This way the noise called, 'twas a woman's voice that cried for help; Ha! See,
Sir, the same that wounded me last night. --


So, this danger is past; and there is yet enough left of the proud Cicilia to
satisfy my Revenge


Cicilia, and Calis, Heaven! what chance, what calamity is this?


Do thou wonder, false Man, to see the ruin thy jealous Soul has made of all
our happiness? Murder, Self-murder, Rape and dishonor threatened,
Self-murder, whose black path thy jealous Heart has forced me to tread, to
save that Honor Lucius would first have ravished. Live, and find all that thou
mistrustedst innocent; And, for thy Curse, let them thou trustest next be as
false as Lucius


O my Fate! Why have I lived to see this day? Orante, be yet so kind in thy
crime as kill me. Durst thou stab? Had thou a power to strike that breast,
and find remorse at mine that am thy Rival? Villain, or kill me, or be sure thy
hated soul shall never sleep in that cursed body of thine, though when it is let
out 'twill but change Hells; Dog, do thou smile upon our miseries


Thy jealousy struck deeper, and more fatal, then his Dagger; that gave the
first wound, that struck my fame, and wounded more then his fury can; false and
unkind, thou deceived'st my heart, and were false to her that loved thee; this
wretch has only acted that my hatred ever feared; the world expected nothing
better from Orante, branded and marked from heaven, and despised by men; But
Lucius, jealous Lucius, has deceived both gods and men, and abused their trust;
but these wounds, I hope, will justify me, and punish Lucius, and deceive the
hopes of cursed Orante


Heaven lend your hand, to save the Princess. -- O, my fate! --


If I were loose, I might call for help.


Like Birds with broken wings we lie expecting sad fates, to be the spoil and
scorn of the foolish fowler; sure I have so much strength as to crawle to Calis


She is faint, but not dead, now she is tame enough; see Lucius, this was your
Cicilia; there is beauty and pleasure even in her dust


Villain, Murderer.


Oh ye gods! lend but so much strength as to save the noblest of women.


Sure heaven's kind to Orante; what music there is in their cries.


Help, Murder; Treason, help!


Ha! loose, I must not lose; time when I have dispatched this, then prepare
your selves to bear us company. -- Lucius, this Cicilia's lips, fruits designed
for thee jealous fool, which thus I gather, lest it wither on the Tree.
Farewell, Lucius, the scorned Orante with all this deformity will leave thee to
imagine the rest; be all the world cursed, so I am blessed


Help heaven, Murder and Treason.


Ha! Amadeo and Calis; then Fortune's a whore, Lie thou there; yet he is alone,
and Orante never feared a single sword. -- Hold, it is enough; death could never
have come so unwelcome as now; had he staid his visit till my revenge had been
perfect I would have saved thy sword this pains; for I had no such foolish
thought as to outlive this day, in which I would have made some as fit for
graves as Orante; Hell on that Sunshine that made me believe there was one
hour of joy destined for Orante; my fate is now all spun in one thread; from the
first to the last accursed


O, Sir; leave talking with that monster, and lend your help here to save the
Princess, that now breathes her last breath, murdered by that horrid villain


The Princess! Heaven forbid.


There is music in that voice, so she dies; I care not so no body else has
her, it is no pain to lose her


O Calis, is it thy arms that embrace me?


Yes, Madam, and your fears are blown over by Prince Amadeo, sent from heaven
to revenge, and save our honors


Prince Amadeo! are his hands sent from heaven to heal the wounds Lucius gave a
heart that loved him beyond her Reason; for I know, 'twas her blindness in me
that neglected Amadeo; but faith and passion must plead for me, yet this truth
let me leave with you; though I lived by love and vows Lucius's; yet his
injuries have made me room to dye Amadeo's, who had my value in spite of my
passion: do not despise me, Sir; for though this heart once swelled with
Lucius, proud of that name, while he was faithful; yet since he could doubt, it
breaks with Amadeo. There lies that false man that beat it from him, when it
pursued him with all that love and kindness could pay; 'twas his ignorance in
the value made him neglect such a Jewel, whilst I too much prized his broken
friendship which has broke my heart; yet by all the peace he has robbed me of I
have not lost one grain of honor the gods gave me in trust, but what his
jealous heart has stolen from me, and pulled strange curses down


Hold, gentle Cicilia, cease to find a new curse; your hate is mortal enough;
and if your wounds give you leave, you will find Lucius needs no enemy but
Lucius; since he has lived to dye unpiti'd, unlamented by Cicilia's, who shall
make his funeral fire since she has frowned upon him? she said Lucius was
false; who then will mourn him? she has condemned; after whose sentence he
scorns to live; Cicilia lived Lucius's, and dies Amadeo's; O heaven, after she
has condemned him, why should your thunder spare Lucius? yet thus innocent he
will fall, and these wounds witness Lucius's innocence, who lived and died
Cicilia's; whose name only filled his heart, and with it thus it breaks; to
show that Lycoris, and proved by unfortunate Lucius


O, what has he done! O hold his hand, for Heavens sake.


What have I done? why, I have let out cruel Cicilia, that she might flow to
Prince Amadeo


O Lucius, Brother, Friend; what has thy rash hand done?


I have done that I would always do to the man the Princess Cicilia hates,
destroyed him; yet this advantage my story will have, I found no peace after
she withdrew her friendship; yet my crime was only excess of love, unpracticed
love; dear Manlius knows I was so unpracticed in loves passion, it cut a
Brother and a Friend from my heart to make room for Cicilia; but love was a
rude guest, and thus I have forced him from my heart, where he has broke all
Laws of Hospitality; O, it is late, and this darkness over my eyes tells me I am
near my home; Manlius, thy hand. Farewell, forgive me, Madam; Behold I dye,
would your hate have more? Behold I dye, nor shall I repent my fall, if my
death find that faith my love could not, who never feared nor loved any thing
but the fair Cicilia; and at what rate, witness this fate


O, help to lead me to him. -- O Lucius stay, and hear my last breath (in
sighs) give my sad heart the lie for having said it loved ought but Lucius; see
these wounds that I wear for Lucius, had I not loved thee why did I select thee
from all the world? O look up, and in charity outlive me; for dying Lucius
brings despair and horror on my soul; O ye gods, lend so much life, at least,
to tell my story; and from dying Cicilia take this truth; Prince Amadeo has
surprising virtues; but 'twas Lucius his jealousy made me see them, 'twas his
injuries pleaded more then they; the Prince called long before; and yet my
heart was deaf to love and him; this Lucius knows, who severely has punished
that passions that distraction which he begot; Not one word? can Lucius his
heart be so incensed as to forget all humanity and civility too? Death, sure
will not refuse thy eyes so much light as to wait upon thy once dear Cicilia to
her grave; O kind heaven, forbid that my sad heart that could not be happy here
should meet Lucius frowning in Elysium too; there at least let us be friends,
that we may meet and mourn this part of our story, and kindly seek each others
shadow; for I am kind enough to believe and mourn the wounds that I have given
Lucius; and I hope Lucius will be so kind to me as to believe these wounds
bleed for Lucius, who thus dies upon his breast; and would fain get into that
heart again from whence thy cruel kindness forced me. One cold kiss I will
take, and then farewell; did Lucius ever love? O be merciful, and say so,
though it be false; there is less sin in such a well natured lie, then with a
cruel truth to add to a friends dying misery, who thus with wounds and prayers
her heart sets open to seek the flying soul of welcome Lucius, loved companion
of my heart


O Lucius, can thy soul be deaf to such charms as these, of force to raise a
Lover from his ashes! O look up, and see Amadeo offer all his hopes to Lucius;
Live gentle soul; if thou hunt'st for Paradise, here it is most perfect in the
friendship of this generous Princess


Prince Amadeo is noble, the Princess divine, all Angel; and Lucius too earthy
to aspire such a friendship


The gods give us but a span of days, and we with folly waste that too; O for
an hour to thank Prince Amadeo, and weep to Lucius those truths which now break
my heart! who if he be just will kindly read and understand these sighs, and
love these tears


Every common spirit can indulge an appetite; choler, lust and revenge prevail
with every beast; but man the noblest creature, made to delight and imitate his
Creator, appointed master over the rest, should in such difficulties as these
(Madam) justify himself Prince of the earth; and this act is my duty as a man;
but as Amadeo, a double tie of honor obliges me, being a Prince of men, from
whom with what justice (Madam) can I expect obedience when they see me rebel
against the gods; and thus yield to my slaves, of which this passion (being
unjust) is one and with what shame shall I appear when it shall be said, that is
the Amadeo that disputed a great War against the Roman Eagles; and in peace
stooped to this Kite, this blind Boy; No, Madam, these be the fiery trials that
must distinguish and justify great and virtuous minds; they are storms, not
harbors, in which the skilful show their virtue and their courage


Great, and noble Amadeo, still, by mind and birth a Prince!


Curse on his heart that breaks this love, noble Lucius; lovely in his crimes
which were but loving crimes; and all these wounds and tears betwixt you are
but like the thorns that grow about the Rose, whose beauty made me thy Rival;
look up, and see me deck thy breast; of whom I prophecy all that is great and
good, while she grows there; but when she shall withdraw her friendship, even
in Amadeo's heart she will pass for low, and very woman; forsaken Lucius will find
constanter enjoyments then beauty or any other love; those doubts, this
friendship, and the diverse faults, but show the Masker in his several shapes;
your rage, his doubts, those fears, were but loves chains and charms, which
unpracticed Lucius took for Love in Arms


Sure we are in heaven already.


Good heaven, what a sight is here? Cicilia! what sad fate is this!


O my dear, dear Sister!


This was unkindly done to steal away from us such a Pattern of virtue and
honor; to leave me ignorant, and alone, to tread the sad world when she is
gone which was my guide; how shall I do but stray and lose my way! I fear I
shall never find my friends


No Questions, nor more discourse, if you love them; there is no kindness like
rest


Clorinda, Otho, dear Otho, come near; and if ever thy Sister were dear to
thee, love and forgive Lucius: Lucius the best Lover, but the worst expresser
of his passion that ever sunk under that god's displeasure. O Otho, in one
grave let our sad Corpse lie, that we may, at least, become one earth


Use no words, give them no answers, I pray, but help to convey them to some
place of rest; lest you strive too late to prevent the ruin this danger
threatens.


Was your Highness a witness of this action?


No, Sir, I came too late; but from Calis, within, you may hear the relation.


What a day is here? how different are the Torches from those that should have
burned? Hymen's yellow one must to the black, I fear, give place; Ha! who is
that? Orante disguised


Yes, Sir; and the foundation upon which all these miseries depend; this is the
cursed cause of all this sad day, 'twas destined to passion; but a Scene so
full of blood and fate no thought could ever have feared, though I confess her
Highness was bent to execute a very extravagant resolution


A Fever only may beget our fears; else I find no dander, there being no vital
part perished; it is only loss of blood, which thus in faintness binds their
senses


Heavens send a blessing that I may show to my Sister how much a Brother Otho
is, while this hated dog lies unburied, and unpitied by the world


Draw him and his cu^sed company off this sacred ground; and then let their
hated Carcasses lie a prey for Birds and Beasts, while we in procession bear
these Lovers; and when you have purged this consecrated place from blood and
murder, to morrow we will sacrifice Hecatombs to Juno, the Deliverer, in
expiation of these Lovers crimes; and join with you in vows and prayers that
kind destiny will restore them to us, while I provide displeased Hymen's Rites
may no longer wont the vows their hearts have writ in heaven


And if heaven smile upon our sacrifice, let me beg Prince Otho will defer our
joys to wait upon their happy days; for I confess my superstitious soul dares
not approach the Temple thus alone, whilst death and black shadow my heart;
sure it must be a fatal Bridal-bed that stands so near the grave of friends


Be your desire the eternal law to Otho; let her love and command, while I love
to obey Clorinda


Here Calis, I have one hand yet left, which thus I will lift to heaven; and
call all the gods to witness that love and faith, which here I give to Calis,
and her peace for ever; and if thy much afflicted heart can forgive what is
past, and love Manlius; we will vye with all the world for blessings, our
miseries will then be pastime; and these dangers, escaped, with more joy told
then now they are feared


The gods have heard my prayers; and now I am confident the Princess will be
happy; and we mortals are vain foolish judges of what heaven can or will do; we
measure the Deity by our weak capacity, who thus in justice lets us fall beyond
our hopes, to raise us thus above our wishes


Lead, holy men, and we will follow; and with patience obey in bearing my own
bowels; but if kind heaven sinile, how happy shall Marius lay down his gray
hairs, after a sacrifice to the Hymen's of my Otho, and ever dear Cicilia


That was the voice of heaven, piety and faith lay holy violent hands upon the
gods, it hastens their blessings, and it breaks their rods; and my heart
foretells me your aged virtues have yet reward in store; and that Cicilia as
well as Clorinda shall receive an Hymeneal blessing from you; let no jealous
Lover look Hymen in the face, but trembling call to mind the fortune of this
place


Let all men sing, and in full Chorus join, and detest this crime. An ancient
Druid left this sacred Hymn, and against jealousy commanded all to sing full
Chorus round the Temple



This jealousy into the world?
From Hell?
Eternal hatred with disdain.
But she the Daughter is of Love,
Sister of Beauty.
She must derive, from the third Sphere,
Her heavenly offspring?
From those immortal flames could she
Draw her cold frozen Pedigree.

Had she her birth?
Beauty and fear did her create
Younger then Love, elder then hate,
Sister to both by Beauties side,
To Love by Fear, to hate allied.
Despair her Issue is, whose Race
Of fruitful mischiefs drowns the space
Of the wide earth in a swollen flood
Of wrath, revenge, spite, rage and blood.

Proceed from Parents so divine?

Do sweet and clear their Waters bring;
Yet mingling with the brackish main,
Nor taste, nor color they retain.

Still fresh, can jealousy do so?

Of hope and fear, her equal bound;
Hope, sprung from favor, worth, or chance,
Toward the fair object does advance:
While fear as watchful Sentinel
Does the invading Foe repel;
And jealousy thus mixed does prove
The season and the salt of Love.
But when Fear takes a larger scope,
Stifling the child Reason, Hope;
Then sitting on the usurped Throne,
She, like a Tyrant, rules alone;
As the wild Ocean unconfind;
And rages as the Northern Wind.
This Chorus was written by M. Thomas Carew, Cup Bearer to Charles the First;
and sung in a Masque at White Hall, Anno 1633. And I presume to make use of it
here, because in the first design, 'twas writ at my request upon a dispute held
betwixt Mistress Cicilia Crofts and my self, where he was present; she being
then Maid of Honor: this I have set down, lest any man should believe me so
foolish as to steal such a Poem from so famous an Author; or so vain as to
pretend to the making of it my self; and those that are not satisfied with this
Apology, and this Song in this place; I am always ready to give them a worse of
mine own


