IF you would have your Daughter virtuously and wisely educated, you must put
her into the Female Academy


The Female Academy, what is that?


Why a House, wherein a company of young Ladies are instructed by old Matrons;
as to speak wittily and rationally, and to behave themselves handsomely, and to
live virtuously


Do any men come amongst them?


O no; only there is a large open Grate, where on the outside men stand, which
come to hear and see them; but no men enter into the Academy, nor women, but
those that are put in for Education; ^o^ they have another large open Grate at
the other end of the Room they discourse in; where on the outside of that
Grate stand women that come to hear them discourse


I will put my Daughter therein to be instructed.


If your Daughter were not of honorable Birth, they would not receive her, for
they take in none but those of ancient Descent, as also rich, for it is a place
of charges


Why then they will not refuse my Daughter, for she is both honorably born,
and also rich


Come Lady, it is your turn this day to take the Chair.


Deliver your Theme.


You speak Lady like a Robber, when he says deliver your Purse; but you must
say propound your Theme


Why then propound your Theme.


I present to your opinion, whether women are capable to have as much Wit or
VVisdome as men


First, I must define what Wit and VVisdome are: as for Wit, it is the
Daughter of Nature, and VVisdome is a Son of the Gods: this Daughter of Nature,
the Lady Wit, is very beautiful, and for the most part her Countenance is very
Amiable, and her Speech delightful; in her Acoustrements she is as all other
of the Female Sex are, various; as sometimes in plain Garments, and sometimes
in glittering Garments; and sometimes she is attired in Garments of as many
several Colors as the Rainbow; and she alters in their Fashions, as often as
in their Substances or Trimmings: as for her humor, it is according to the
nature of her Sex, which is as various and changing as her Acoustrements; for
that sometimes she is merry and jesting, other times pleasing and delightful;
sometimes melancholy, sometimes fantastical, other times spightfull and
censorious, and often times wild and wanton, unless discretion rules and leads
her, who keeps her within the bounds and pales of Modesty; also her discourses
are various, as sometimes she will flatter grossly, other times ^he will rail
maliciously, and sometimes she will speak so eloquently, and demean her self so
elegantly, as to ravish the minds of the beholders and ^earers^ This Lady Wit
has nine Daughters, very beautiful Ladies, namely the Nine Muses; and every
several Muse partakes of every several Humor of the Mother: These nine
beautiful Ladies, Natures Grandchildren, and Wits Daughters, have vowed
single lives, living always in the Court with their Mother, whose Court is a
very glorious Palace; for it is composed of Celestial flame, and Divine
Spirits were the Architectures thereof; the Servants and Courtiers of the Lady
Wit are Poets, men of all Nations, Qualities, Dignities and Humors; these
Courtiers the Poets, make love to the Lady Wits Daughters, the nine Muses, and
often receive favors from them; which favors their Servants the Poets braid
them into Rimes, and make several works of Verse, then tie them into True
Lovers Knots, and then as all Lovers use to do, with their Mistresses favors,
vaingloriously show them to the public view of the world; for though the Lady
Muses will not marry, yet they receive Courtly addresses, and take delight to
be wooed and fued to; the younger sort of Poets are Amorous Lovers; the Grave
and more ancient Poets are Platonic Lovers, and some are Divine Lovers, and
some are Heroic Lovers, and some are Satirical Lovers, which woo in a crabbid
style: but to conclude of Wit, there are good Wits which have foolish
Judgments; for though Wit and VVisdome are Sisters and Brothers, both the
Children of Nature, yet for the most part, the Brother is a mere Fool, and the
Sister has a great wit; but some have Masculine Wits, and Effeminate
Judgments, as if their beams were Hermophrica

The next I am to define is VVisdome, who as I said, is a Son of the Gods: this
VVisdome is a person of perfect and upright Shape, of well-composed Features,
of a manly Garb, and an assured Countenance, In his speech he is of a ready
delivery, and he has a well-tempered Humor: as for the Acoustrements of his
Person, he changes them according to the times and occasions: His constant
habitation is in the strong Tower of Honesty, this Tower is built round,
without ends or corners, or by places; and it stands upon four Pillars, as
Prudence, Fortitude, Justice and Temporance; upon every several Pillar are
Letters engraven, wherein may be read the proper uses, benefits, and advantages
of each Pillar: These Pillars of Support, causes this Tower to be inpregnable;
for though there are many assaults made against it, as by Riches, which shoots
his golden Bullets out of his golden Canons at it, striving to batter it down;
and Power brings a mighty Army to assault it, and Danger of Death strives to
storm it, and Flattery and Insinuation to undermine it, yet it holds out
without any breach therein; for the walls of this Tower, named Honesty, are of
a wonderful strength, for they are as durable as an entire Diamond, not to be
dissolved, and as transparant as a Crystal, without the least spot, stain, or
blemish: In this Tower as I said, lives Wisdom, a most magnificent Lord he is,
and is attended numerously and nobly: his chief Favorite is Truth, his chief
Counselors are Reason, Understanding, Observation, Experience, and Judgment;
his chief Officers are Patience, Industry, and Opportunity; his Domestic
Servants are the Appetites, which Servants he rules and governs with great
moderation; his Nobility are the Passions, which he pe^^rrs according to their
merit; but those that are apt to be Factious, he severely punishes, for he is
one that loves peace, and hates brulleries, or any dissension: he is a person
of the quickest Sense, for he has a most piercing sight to foresee dangers, as
to avoid them, and can well distinguish the right ways from the wrong; likewise
he has a most clear hearing, for nothing passes by that concerns him, but the
sound gives him an Alarm to stand upon his guard, or a charge to take his
advantage; but he has a silent tongue, for he never speaks but it is to some
purpose also he has a marvelous quick Scent, to smell out a Rebellion or
Treason, and he will follow it pace by pace, as Hounds do Hares, and never
leaves till he has hunted it out; also his Touch is very sensible, he soon
feels a courtesy or injury, the first he receives gratefully, and feels
tenderly, the other he receives strongly, and gripes hard, when he can take
fast hold, otherwise he lets it pass or fall, as if his touch were numbed; he
is a person which is so solicited by the weak, sought to by the wronged,
flattered by the ambitious, sued to by the distressed; and he often fits in the
Court of Errors, to rectify the disorder therein: sometimes he has been in
great humane Councels, but that is very rare; indeed he is so seldom in great
humane Councels, as he is hardly known, for not one among a thousand that did
ever see him, much less to have any acquaintance with him, for he is reserved,
and not company for every one: But there are many that falssy pretend not only
to be acquainted with him, but gets fall Vizards, and pretend to be Wisdom it
self, and the world for the most part is cozened and abused with these Cheats,
in not knowing the right and true Wisdom; and how should they? when Wisdom it
self appears so seldom, as he is a stranger even in Kings Courts and Princes
Palaces, and so great a stranger he is in many Courts and Councels, that if by
chance he should be there, they thrust him out as a troublesome Guest, and
laugh at his advice as foolish, or condemn his Counsel as treacherous: but now
I have declared unto you whom Wit and Wisdom are, now I am to give my opinion
whether women are capable of their Society; but truly I must tell you it is a
difficult question, by reason the several Educations, which are the Ushers that
lead humane Creatures to several Societies, for there are Society; of the
Ignorant and foolish, as well as of the witty and wise, and several Ushers
belonging thereto; and indeed these latter Societies are numerous, and of all
sorts; the other are Societies of the most choicest, for though Wit is not an
absolute Goddess, nor humane Wisdom an absolute God, yet they are a degree
above other earthly mortals, but Fools are produced from the degrees of
Mortality, and Ignorance is the Daughter of Obs^^rity; the Ushers of these are
Obstinacy, Stupidity, and Illiterature, which leads mortals to dangerous and
unexcessible ways; in this last Society, for the most part women are of, as
being bred therein, and having such ill Tutors and Guides, they must needs err,
for there is an old saying, When the Blind leads the Blind, they must needs
fall into the Ditch, nor having sight to choose their way; so women breeding up
women, the Generations must needs be Fools: for the first, women had an ill
Tutor, the Devil, which neither instructed her in the knowledge of Wisdom nor
Wit, but learned her hurtful dissimulation, to which she has bred all her
Female Generations successively, as from Female to Female; but your question
is, whether women are capable of Wit and Wisdom: truly in my opinion women are
more capable of Wit than VVisdome, by reason they are both of the Female
Gender, which may cause some sympathy in their Natures; and in some things they
do plainly sympathy and agree, for Wit is wild and various, and so are women,
and Wit is busy and meddles with every thing, cause, or subject, so do women;
Wit is fantastical, and so are women, Wit is always in extremes, and so are
women, Wit does talk much, and so do women, Wit is humoursome, and so are
women, Wit is prodigal, and so are women, Wit loves praises, and so do women,
Wit does sport and play, dance and sing the time away, and so do women, Wit
is many times wanton, and so are women; Thus far are women capable of the
Society and Conversation of Wit; but I doubt of her subtle Invention, quick
Apprehension, rare Conceptions, elevated Fancy, and smooth Eloquution

As for Wisdom, women seem to all outward appearance to have a natural
Antipathy abhorring his severe and strict Rules, hating his mediciable
Admonitions, his profitable Counsels and Advice, his wary ways, his prudent
forecast, his serious actions, his temperate life and sober disposition; all
which makes them incapable of the Society of Wisdom


I suppose you have heard that a company of young Gentlemen have set up an
Academy, next to the Ladies Academy


We heard nothing of it.


Why then I will tell you, the men are very angry that the women should speak
so much, and they so little, I think: for they have made that Room which they
stood in to see and hear the Ladies speak in, so a place for themselves to
speak in, that the Ladies may hear what they can say


Faith if you will have my opinion, it is, that the men do it out of a mockery
to the Ladies


It Is likely so, for they rail extremely that so many fair young Ladies are so
strictly enclosed, as not to suffer men to visit them in the Academy


Faith if the men should be admitted into their Academy, there would be work
enough for the Grave Matrons, were it but to act the part of Midwives


Lady, at this time let the Theme of your discourse be of discoursing.


As for Discourse it is differently various, some discourses are delightful
and pleasing, others tedious and troublesome, some rude and uncivil, some vain
and unnecessary, some graceful and acceptable, some wise and profitable; but
in most discourses time is lost, having nothing that is worthy to be learned,
practiced, or observed: But there are two sorts of discourses, or manner of
ways of discoursings, as there is a discoursing within the mind, and a
discourse with words; as for the inward discourse in the mind, it is to
discourse to a man's self, as if they were discoursing to others, making
Questions or Propositions, Syllogisms and Conclusions to himself, wherein a man
may deceive himself with his own false arguments, for it is an old saying, That
it is one thing to oppose himself, and another thing to be opposed by others,
and it is easy to argue without opposition; As for discoursing with words, it
is more difficult than to discourse with thoughts: for though words are as high
and substantial as thoughts, yet the Mouth is not so ready in speaking, as the
Brain in thinking, and the Brain can present more thoughts at one time, than
the Mouth can deliver words at one time: but words, or Rhetoric is apt to
deceive a man, as his Concepceptions, especially Orators, which draw themselves
with the force of Rhetoric, from the right and the truth, so as an Orator is
as apt to delude himself, as to delude his Auditory, if he make words or
eloquence the ground of his Questions, Persuasions, or Judgment, and not
Reason, for Reason must find out the truth, and right, and Truth must judge the
cause; but Rhetoric is for the most part a Vizard to right Reason, for it
seems a natural Face, and is not so: Rhetoric seems right Reason, but is not:
Also there are extemporal discourses, and discourses premeditated, extemporal
sounds best to the ears of the hearers, although of less wit than premeditated
discourses, because they are delivered more naturally, and so flow more freely
and easily, which makes the noise not only to sound more sweetly, but the
discourse to be more delightful both to the ears and the mind of the hearers,
and more ready to the understanding; but of all discourses the disputive
discourses are harshest: Indeed all disputive discourses are like Chromatick
Music, wherein is more Skill than Harmony; but all discourses should be
fitted, measured, or chosen to the time, place, persons, and occasions, for
that discourse which is proper for one time, place, or person, is improper for
another time, place, or person, as a discourse of mirth in a time of sadness,
a familiar discourse from an Inferior to a Superior, a vain discourse to a
serious humor, or an Effeminate discourse to a man, or a Masculine discourse
to a woman, and many the like examples might be given: Also there are
discourses that are sensible discourses, rational discourses, and witty
discourses: also there are other discourses, that have neither Sense, Reason,
Wit, nor Fancy in them: Also there are Clownish discourses and Courtly
discourses: Also there is a general discoursing, and particular discoursing,
also Scholastical discourses and Poetical discourses: but of all the several
ways, manners, or sorts of discourses and discoursings, Let me commend the
Poetical discourses and discoursings, which are brief and quick, full of
variety, curiosity, and newness, being as new as peep of day, as refreshing as
the Zephyrus wind, as modest as the blushing morning, sweet as the flowery
Spring, as pleasant as a Summers Evening, as profitable as Autumns Harvest, as
splenderous as the midday Sun, as flowing as the full Tide Sea, as dilating as
the spreading Air, as fruitful as the fertile earth, and have as great an
influence upon the Natures, Dispositions, and Humors of men, as the Stars, and
Planets in the Heavens have, it takes life from the Celestial flame, and is
produced from the Gods on high: and this discourse makes Man resemble to a
Deity


Whither so hastily?


I am going to hear them speak in the Academy.


They have done for this time.


And did they spaek well.


As they use to do.


Why they never spoke before there?


Where?


Why in the Academy.


Why I am sure I heard one Lady speak yesterday, and another to day.


Ladies, I mean the Academy of men.


Why do the men intend to speak?


Yes presently, if they have not done speaking already.


Gentlemen, we need no Learned Scholars, nor Grave Sages to propound the Theme
of our discourse in this place, and at this time; for our minds are so full of
thoughts of the Female Sex, as we have no room for any other Subject or Object;
wherefore let the Theme be what it will, our discourses will soon run on them:
but if we could bring women as easily into our arms, as into our brains; and
had we as many Mistresses in our possessions, as we have in our imaginations,
we should be much more happy than we are; Nay, had we been blind, deaf, and
insensible to the Sex, we had been happy, unless that Sex had been more kinder
than they are; but they are cruel, which makes men miserable: but Nature had
made Beauty in vain, if not for the use of the Masculine Sex, wherefore Nature
forbids restraint, and it is a sin against Nature for women to be In^loystred,
Retired, or restrained: Nay, it is not only a sin against Nature, but a
grievous sin against the Gods, for women to live single lives, or to vow
Virginity: for if women live Virgins, there will be no Saints for Heaven, nor
worship nor Adoration offered to the Gods from Earth: for if all women live
Virings, the Race of Mankind will be utterly extinguished; and if it be a
general sin to live Virgins, no particular can be exempted; and if it be
lawful for one to live a Virgin, it is lawful for all; so if it be unlawful
for one, it is unlawful for all; but surely the Gods would not make any thing
lawful that were against themselves: But to conclude, those women which
restrain themselves from the company and use of men, are damned, being accused
by Men, judged by Nature, and condemned by the Gods


What say you, will you go into the Academy?


No faith, I mean not to be damned.


I am of your mind, I will run unto the men to save me.


So will I, since the ways of Salvation are so easy and so pleasant.


Lady, let the Theme of your discourse be at this time on the behavior of our
Sex


It is a greater difficulty for a woman to behave her self discreetly in
private Visitations, than for a man to speak wisely in privy Councels: and it
is a greater difficulty for a woman to behave her self well in a public
Assembly, than for a man to speak eloquently in a public Auditory: and it is a
greater difficulty for a woman to behave her self well to several Persons, and
in several Assemblies, than for a man to behave himself gallantly in several
Battles, and as much dishonor comes in the misbehaviour of the one, as the
cowardlinesse of the other: Wherefore there requires as much skill, care, and
conduct in a woman's behavior, in visiting, entertaining, placing, applying,
and discoursing, as to a Commander in Mustering, Training, Intrenching,
Besieging, Inbattelling, Fighting, and Retreating; for it is not enough for a
woman to behave her self according to her Degree, Quality, Dignity, Birth, and
Breeding, Age, Beauty, Wit, and Fortune; But according to Time, Place, and
Occasion, Business, and Affairs, as also to the Humors, Capacities,
Professions, Dignities, Qualities, Births, Breedings, Fortunes, Ages, and Sexes
of those persons she is in Company and Conversation withal: Also in mixed
Companies she must have a mixed behavior, and mixed discourses, as sometimes to
one, then to another, according as she can handsomely and civilly apply or
address her self; and to those that apply and address themselves to her: for
a woman must not behave her self, or discourse unto a great Lord or Prince, as
to a Peasant, or to a Peasant as to a great Lord or Prince, nor to a Soldier
as to a Divine, nor to a Divine as to a Soldier, nor to a Statesman as to a
Tradesman, nor to a Tradesman as to a Statesman, nor to a Flattering Gallant,
as to a Grave Senior, nor to a Grave Senior as to a Flattering Gallant, nor to
a young man as to an ancient man, nor to a Boy as to a man, nor to a woman as
to a man, nor to a Poet as to a woman, or as to those men that understand not
Poetry, nor to learned men, as to ignorant men. Also an ancient Grave Matron
must not behave her self like a wanton young Girl, nor a Wife like a Maid, nor
a Widow like a Wife, nor a Mother like her Daughter, nor a Mistress like her
Servant, nor a Servant like a Mistress, nor a great Lady like a Country wise,
nor a Country wife like a great Lady, for that would be ridiculous; Indeed it
is easier for a middle Rank or Degree, at least it is oftener seen, to behave
themselves better than those of high Titles and great Estates, or those of a
very mean Condition, and of low Birth, for the one is apt to err with excessive
pride, the other with an excessive rudeness, both being bold and ignorantly
bred, knowing not how to be civil, nor what belongs to civil Persons; for the
pride of the one scorns to be instructed, and the poverty of the other has not
means to keep and pay Instructers; for the excess of Plenty nussles the one in
Ignorance, and excess of Poverty blindfolds the other from knowledge: but to
conclude of the behavior of women, first as to the generality, they must
behave themselves civily and circumspectly, to particulars, modestly and
friendly; for the chief Principals of behavior are twelve, six good, and six
bad; the six good are, Ceremony, Civility, Modesty, Humility, Friendship, and
Obedience: The first is Majestical and Magnificent, the second Noble, the third
Virtuous, the fourth Humane, the fifth Generous, the sixth Pious; The first is
Graceful, the second Sociable, the third Delightful, the fourth Natural, the
fifth Helpful, the sixth Necessary; The first belongs to Dignity, the second to
Breeding, the third to Youth, the fourth to Age, the fifth to Wealth, the sixth
to Peace

As for the six bad Principals, is, to be Proud, Bold, Rude, Wanton,
Disobedient, and Cruel; The first is, Insolent, the second Impudent, the third
Ignorant, the fourth Brutish, the fifth Unnatural, the sixth Wicked: The first
lives with mean Births, joined with good Fortune, the second lives with
ignorant and doltish Spirits, the third with base Breeding, the fourth with
Beasts, the fifth with uncivil Nations, the sixth with Atheists: The first is to
be Slighted, the second to be Pityed, the third to be Shunned, the fourth to be
Hated, the fifth to be Governed, the sixth to be Punished


What say you to these young Ladies?


I say, that though they be but young Ladies, they discourse like old Women.


THe beauty of the Female Sex has as great an influence upon the eyes of men,
as the stars of the Heavens have upon their nature and disposition: but as a
cloud of ill Education, covers, changes, or buries the good influence of the
Stars; so a cloud of Time covers, changes, and buries the beauties of the
fairest Ladies faces, which alters the affections of men, and buries all the
delight that was received therefrom, in the ruins of age, and the graves of
wrinckles: But beauty, whilst it is fresh and flourishing, it is the most
powerful Conqueresse and Triumphs in the Chariot of Youth; and though her
Masculine Subjects forsake her, when time has displaced her, and weakened her
power; yet she were unwise, not to take pleasure in her Victories, whilst she
may


COme, come, Neighbor, we shall get no room to see and hear the young Ladies,
if we go not quickly


Yes, let us go; but stay Neighbor, I must run home again, for I have left the
key in the Celar door


Let it be there for this time.


By my truth I must not, for my maid Joan, and the Prentice, will drink out all
my Ale, and strong Beer, and there will be none left to give my Husband a
draught when he goes to bed


What, Neighbor, are you come back already?


Why there is no getting in; the Doorkeeper beat me back, and said there was
no room for Citizens Wives, for the room was only kept for Ladies, and
Gentlewomen of Quality


Well, we may come to be Ladies one day, although not Gentlewomen, and then we
shall not so often be beaten back


Let us go to the Gentlemen's side, they will receive us, and use us kindly.


LAdies, let the Theme of our discourse, at this time, be of Truth.


Truth, although she has but one face, which is a natural face, yet she has
many several countenances; for sometimes her countenance is severe, other times
kind and familiar, sometimes it is sad, sometimes merry, other times pleasing
and delightful: also she has as different humors, as she has countenances,
according to the Cause, or Occasion; likewise, her presence, or approach, shows
the different Effects, and several Causes; or from one Cause on several
Objects, or Subjects: As for Example, sometimes her Approach shows man to be
Miserable, or Happy; as when she comes to inform him of good Fortune, or bad;
or when she presents him with right Understanding of the condition he is in:
But in Truth, in whatsoever countenance, or humor she puts on, she is a most
beautiful Lady: for although she do not shine as the Sun, which dazles and
obscures the sight with his splendrous beams, yet she does appear like a
bright, clear day, wherein, and whereby, all things are seen perfectly; and
although she have various Humors, yet her Actions are just, for the alteration
of her Countenance, and Humors, are not to deceive men, nor she takes no
delight in her own sad Approach, to grieve men, but she does bear apart, both
of their Grief and Joy: she makes neither the Chances, Fortunes, Accidents nor
Actions, but only declares them: she is neither the Cause, nor Effects, but
only shows the several Effects of Causes, or what causes those Effects: She is
of a sweet Nature, and an humble Disposition, she does as freely, and commonly
accompany the Poor, as the Rich, the Mean as the Great: Indeed, her constant
Habitation and dwelling, is among the Learned and Industrious men; but she has
an opposite or rival, namely Falsehood, which often obscures her, and is often
preferred before her: this Falsehood, her Rival, is of the nature of a Curtezan,
as all Curtezans are, as to flatter, and insinuate her self and company, to all
men's good liking, and good opinion: she is full of deceit and dissembling, and
although she hates Truth, yet she imitates her as much as she can; I do not say
she imitates the Justice, Severity, and Plainness of Truth; for those, of all
things, or actions, she shuns; but she imitates her Behavior and Countenance;
for although Falsehood is fowl, and filthy of her self, yet by artificial Paint,
she makes herself appear as fair, and pure as Truth; but the deservingly Wife
can soon see the difference between the artificial fair of Falsehood, and the
true, natural, fair complexion of Truth, although fools do admire, and are
sooner caught, so, for the most part deceived with the deceiving Arts of
Falsehood, than the natural Verity of Truth: for Falsehood makes a glaring show
at the first sight, but the more she is viewed, the worse she appears; whereas
Truth, the more she is viewed, the better she appears: also Falsehood uses
Rhetoric, to allure and deceive with her Eloquent Tongue, whereas Truth speaks
little her self, but brings always, and at all times, and in all places, and
to all things, Right Reason, and plain Proof to speak for her, who speak
without flourishing Phrases, or decking Sentences, or Scholastical Rules,
Methods or Tenses, but speak to the purpose, deliver the matter briefly, and
keep to the sense of Truth, or true sense, which is both the best and natural
way of speaking, and the honest Practice of Truth, whereas Eloquence is one of
the most cozening and abusing Arts as is; for as Paint is a Vizard on the face,
so is Eloquence a Vizard on the mind, and the Tongue is the Pencil of Decei^,
drawing the Pictures of Discourse; thus Falsehood strives to resemble Truth, as
much as artificially she can


How do you like the Ladies and their discoursings?


I like some of the Ladies ^iscourses better than others; and I like some of
the Ladies better than the other; but let us go hear the men


Those women that retire themselves from the Company of men, are very
ungrateful; as, first to Nature, because she made them only for breed; next to
men who are their Defenders, Protectors, their Nourishers, their Maintainers;
their Instructers, their Delighters, their Admirers, their Lovers and Deisiers;
as men defend them from the raging blustering Elements, by building them Houses,
and not only build them Houses for shelter, but Houses for pleasure and
magnificency: Also men protect them from wild ravenous and cruel Beasts, that
otherwise would devour them; for as women have not natural strength to build,
so have they not natural courage to sight, being for the most part as fearful
as weak: Likewise men nourish them, for men Fish Fowl, and hunt to get them
Food to feed them, for which women would neither take the pains, nor endure the
labor, nor have the heart to kill their food; for women by nature are so
pitiful, and have such tender dispositions, as they would rather suffer death
themselves, than destroy life in other Creatures; Also men maintain them by
composing themselves into Commonwealths, wherein is Traffic and Commerce,
that each Family may live by each other; Also Laws to keep them in peace, to
rule them in order, to defend them with Arms, which women could never do, by
reason they know not what Government to settle in or to, nor what Laws to make,
or how to execute those Laws that were made; neither could they plead Suits,
decide Causes, Judge Controversies, deal out right, or punish Injuries, or
condemn Criminals: Also men are the Instructers to inform them of Arts and
Sciences, which women would nere have had the patience to study, for they would
never have allowed so much time and solitary musing, for the perfecting or
devoting those Conceptions, as those that first invented or found them out;
besides if women were not instructed by men of the natural cause of Effects,
how often would they have been affrighted almost to death, with the loud and
terrifying Thunders, the flashing Lightenings, the dark Eclipses, the unsteady
Earthquakes, the overflowing Tides, and many the like natural Effects from
hidden Causes ^ besides, women would want all those conveniences that Art
affords them, and furnishes them with: Also men instruct women with the Mystery
of the Gods, whereas for want of which knowledge, they would have been damned
through ignorance: Also men are their Delighters, they traffic on the Sea,
all over the world, to every several Climate and Country, to find and to bring
the Female Sex Curiosities, hazarding their lives for the same; whereas women
could neither build their Ships, nor guide them on the Seas when they were
built; they have not strength to pull and tug great Cable Ropes, to set and
spread large Sails, to cast and weigh Massy Anchors, no, not in a calm, much
less in furious storms, with which men often fight, though not with Arms, with
Subtility and Skill, by which the Elements are conquered still, whereas women
are conquered, and not only being strengthlesse and heartlesse, but
healthlesse; for not only the roaring Seas, and whistling winds, and rattling
showers, and rumbling Thunders, and fiery Lightenings, Rocks, Shelves, and
Sands unknown, or not to be avoided, besides Mountains of Ice, if to the
Northern Pole, all which would terrify them, yet their weak bodies, sick
stomachs, and nice Appetites, could never endure long Voyages; they would vomit
out their life before they could sail to their assigned Port, or Haven: Also
men are women's admirers; they gaze on their Beauties, and praise their sweet
Graces, whereas women through envy detract from each other; Also men are women's
only True Lovers, they flatter, kiss and please them, whereas women are apt to
quarrel, rail and fight with each other: And lastly, men Deifie women, making
them Goddesses by their Poetical Descriptions and Elevations, whereas Nature
made them mere Mortals, Human creatures; wherefore it is a great ingratitude,
nay a horid ingratitude in those women, that deny men their Company,
Conversation, and Communication^ wherefore men have not only Reason to take it
ill, but to be angry with those women that shun or restrain their Company from
them; but good Counsel ought to go before Anger, for the difference betwixt
good Counsel and Anger, is, that good Counsel goes before a fault is committed,
and Anger follows when a fault is committed, for as good Counsel or
Admonishment is to prevent a fault, so Anger is a Punishment for a fault past


Is your Daughter put into the Academy?


Yes.


How long Madam has your Daughter been in the Academy?


This week, but she has not profited much, for I do not hear her discourse.


First it is to be considered, whether your Daughter be capable of discoursing,
for she must have a natural ingenuity to the Art of Rhetoric


My Daughter was always a pretty talking Girl, as any in all the Country and
Town I lived in


Yes, Children may talk prettily for Children, but when they come to be women,
it is a question whether they will talk wisely or no; but let us go hear which
of the Ladies discourses to day


Lady, for this time let the Theme of your discourse be of Discourse.


Reverend Matron, this Theme has been discoursed of before by one of our
Academy, but yet by reason one and the same Theme may be discoursed of after
different manners or ways, I shall obey you

As for Discourse, there is of four sorts; the first is discoursing in the
mind, which is reasoning

The second is discoursing with words, which is speaking,

The third is discoursing by signs, which is action or acting.

The last is discoursing by Figures, which is by Letters and Hieroglyphics,
which is by Printing, Writing, Painting, and the like

As for the first, which is a discourse in the mind, which is Reasoning, which
reasoning is a discourse with things, and not with words, as such a thing is
not such a thing, and what such things are, and what they are not, or in what
such things agreee or disagree, sympathy, or antipathy, or such things
resemble, or not resemble, or on the cause of things, or their effects, or the
like: This discourse is in the mind, which is distinguishing, and
distinguishing belongs to Judgment

The second discoursing is with words, which is Speech, and words are not
things or notches, but only marks of things, or nicks, or notches to know
things by; and the Tongue is the Tally on which they are scored: for Speech is
a number of words, which words are made and joined together by the Breath,
Tongue, Teeth, and Lips, and the continuance make a discourse; for a discourse
is like a line or thread, whereon are a number of words strung, like as a Chain
of Beads, if the words be well sorted, and fitly and properly matched, as also
evenlystrung, the discourse is pleasant and delightful; this Chain of
discourse is longer or shorter, according as the Speaker pleases. The third
discourse, is a discourse by Signs, which is in Actions, as some can discourse
by the Motion of their Faces, Countenances, Hands, Fingers, Paces, or Measures,
or by the cast of the Eyes, and many such like Postures, Looks, Actions, and
several such ways of Motion as have been invented to be understood. This and
the first kind of discourse, as by things and motions, beasts may have, for
ought we can know to the contrary. The last is by Figures, or Letters, Prints,
Hieroglyphics, and painted Stories, or engraven in Metal, or cut, or carved in
Stone, or molded, or formed in Earth, as clay, or the like; in this kind of
discourse, the Pencil has sometimes outdone the Pen, as the Painter has
outdone the Historian and Poet: This discoursing by Signs, or Figures, are
discourses to the eye, and not to the ear. There is also another kind, or sort
of discoursing, which is hardly learned as yet, because newly invented, or at
lest, to what I have heard, which is by Notes, and several Strains in Music. I
only mention it, because I never heard it but once, and then I did not
understand it: but yet it was by a skillful and ingenious Musician, which
discoursed a story of his Travels, in his playing on a Musical Instrument,
namely, the Harpsical. But certainly, to my understanding, or reason, it did
seem a much easier way of discoursing, than discoursing by actions, or posture.
But to end my discourse of Discoursing, which discoursing may be by several
ways, several actions and postures, by several creatures, and in several
Languages: but reasoning is the Souls Language, words the Language of the
Senses, action the Life's Language, Writing, Printing, Painting, Carving and
Molding, are Arts several Languages, but Music is the Language of the Gods


HOw do you like the Ladies discourse?


As I like discourse.


How is that?


Why I had rather hear a number of words, than speak a number of words.


Then thou art not of the nature of Mankind; for there is no man that had not
rather speak than hear


No, it is a sign I am not of the nature of Womankind, that will hear nothing,
but will speak all; indeed, for the most part, they stop their Ears with their
Tongues, at lest, with the sound of their Voices


IT were too tedious to recite the several humors of the female Sex; their
scornful Pride, their obstinate Retiredness, their reserved Coyness, their
facil Inconstancy, by which they become the most useless, and most unprofitable
Creatures that nature has made; but when they are joined to men, they are the
most useful, and most profitable Creatures nature has made; wherefore, all
those women that have common reason, or sense of shame, will never retire
themselves from the company of men: for what women that have any consideration
of Honor, Truth, or touch of Goodness, will be the worst of all Creatures,
when they may be the best? but the truth of it is, women are spoiled by the
over-fond dotage of men; for being flattered, they become so self-conceited, as
they think they were only made for the Gods, and not for men; and being
Mistrisses of men's affections, they usurp their Masculine Power and Authority,
and instead of being dutiful, humble and obedient to men, as they ought to be,
they are Tyrannical Tyrannizers


THe young Gallants methinks begin to be whetted with Anger.


They have reason, when the women have such dull, blunt Appetites.


LAdies, let the Theme of your discourse be, at this time, of Friendship.


This Theme may more easily be discoursed of, than Friendship made; by reason
it is very difficult to make a right Friendship, for hard it is to match men in
agreeable Humors, Appetites, Passions, Capacities, Conversations, Customs,
Actions, Natures and Dispositions, all which must be to make a true and lasting
Friendship, otherwise, two Friends will be like two Horses that draw contrary
ways, whereas Souls, Bodies, Education and Lives, must equally agree in
Friendship; for a worthy honest man cannot be a friend to a base and unworthy
man, by reason Friendship is both an offensive and defensive League between two
Souls and Bodies; and no actions, either of the Souls or Bodies, or any outward
thing, or fortune belonging thereunto, are to be denied; wherefore Knaves with
Knaves, and unworthy Persons with unworthy Persons, may make a Friendship, and
Honest men with Honest men, and worthy Persons with worthy Persons, may do the
like: but an Honest man with a Knave, or a worthy Person with a base man, or an
Honorable Person with a mean Fellow, a noble Soul with a base Nature, a Coward
with a Valiant man, can make no true Friendship. For, put the case, in such
friendships, my Friend should desire me to do a base Action for his sake, I
must either break Friendship, or do unworthily, but as all worthy Persons make
Truth their Godesse, which they seek and worship, Honor the Saint which they
pray too, Virtue, the Lady which they serve, so Honesty is the only Friend they
trust and rely on, and all the World is obliged to Honesty, for upright and
just dealing


Methinks the women's Lectural discourse is better than the men's; for in my
opinion, the men's discourses are simple, childish, and foolish, in comparison
of the women's


Why, the subject of the discourse is of women, which are simple, foolish, and
childish


There is no sign of their simplicity or folly, in their discourse or Speeches,
I know not what may be in their Actions


Now you come to the point, for the weakness of women lies in their Actions,
not in their Words; for they have sharp Wits and blunt Judgments


Lady, let the Theme of your discourse to day be of a Theater.


A Theater is a public place for public Actions, Orations, Disputations,
Presentations, whereunto is a public resort; but there are only two Theaters,
which are the chief, and the most frequented; the one is of War, the other of
Peace; the Theater of War is the Field; and the Battles they sight, are the
Plays they Act, and the Soldiers are the Tragedan^s, and the Theater of Peace
is the stage, and the Plays there Acted are the Humors, Manners, Dispositions,
Natures, Customs of men thereon described and acted, whereby the Theaters are
as Schools to teach Youth good Principles, and instruct them in the Nature and
Customs of the World and Mankind, and learn men to know themselves better than
by any other way of instruction; and upon these Theatres^ they may learn what
is noble and good, what base and wicked, what is ridiculous and misbecoming,
what graceful and best becoming, what to avoid and what to imitate; the Genius
that belongs to the Theater of War is Valor, and the Genius that belongs to
the Theater of Peace is Wit: the designer of the rough Plays of War, is a
General or Council; the designer of the smooth Plays of Peace is a Poet, or a
chief Magistrate; but the difference of these Plays Acted on each Theater, is,
the one is real, the other feigned, the one in earnest, the other in jest; for
a Poet only feigns Tragedies, but the Soldiers do truly act Tragedies; on the
Poetical Theater I will only insist, for this Theater belongs more to our
persons, and is a more fitter Subject for the discourse of our Sex, than War
is; for we delight more in Scenes than in Battles: I will begin first with
Poets, who are the Authors and makers of these kind of Plays; Fame has spoke
loud, both of ancient and modern Poets; as for the ancient Poets, they are a
length out of the reach of my Judgment, so as my opinion will hardly reach so
far; but as for our Modern Poets, that have made Plays in our Modern times,
although they deserve praise, yet not so much nor so high Applause as is given
them; for most of their Plors, or Foundation of their Plays, were taken out of
old Authors, as from the Greeks and Romans, Historians and Poets, also all the
Modern Romances are taken out of these Stories, and many Plays out of these
Romances


Lady, give me leave a little while to instruct you, as to tell you, that all
Romances should be so; for the ground of a right Romance is a true story, only
falsehood is intermixed therein, so that a Romance is a compound of Truth and
Falsehood


Give me leave to answer you, that in my opinion, a right Romance is Poetical
Fictions put into a Historical Style; but for Plays, the true Comedy is pure
Love and Humors, also the Customs, Manners, and the Habits, and inbred
qualities of mankind; And right Tragi-Comedies are the descriptions of the
Passions which are created in the Soul; And a right Tragedy is intermixed with
the Passions, Appetites, and Humors of men, with the influence of outward
actions, accidents, and misfortunes: but as I said, some Poets take the Plots
out of true History, others out of feigned History, which are Romances, so as
their Plots (for the most part) are mere Translations, and often times the Wit
is also but a translated Wit, only metamorphosed after their own way; but the
truth is, that some of them their Wit is their own, and their Plots were
stolen, or plainly taken, and some their Plots are their own, but the Wit
stolen; but of all theft, Wit is never confessed; and some neither the Plot nor
Wit is their own, and other; both Plots and Wit are truly their own; These
last Poets (although but very few) are the true Sons of Nature, the other but
as adulterate issues; But for the most part, our Modern Plays, both Plots and
Wit, are mere translations, and yet come out as boldly upon the Stage, as if
the Translators were the Original Authors, thinking, or at least hoping that
the alteration of the Language conceals the theft, which to the unlearned it
does, but the learned soon find them out, and see all their Bodies, VVings,
Legs, Tail, and Feathers, although they hide their head in the Bush of
Ignorance. I speak not in discommendation of these Translations, nor
Translators, for Translations are so far from being condemned, as they ought to
be much, nay very much commended, and highly praised, if it be such as is
praise worthy, for old Authors may in some expressions be more profitable and
good, both for Wit and Examples, than the modern; and the Translators may be
commended both for their Judgment and Learning; besides, very good Translators
must have a sympathetical Genius, with the Original Author, but their
Condemnation proceeds from the Translators unjust owning of it, upon
themselves, or in translating it to the Authors prejudice


Lady, let me interrupt you once again, to ask your opinion how you like the
Italian and French Plays


As well as I can like any thing that is a strain beyond Nature, or as I may
say, Natures Constraint: for the truth is, in their discourse or rehearsals,
they do not only raise their Voice a Note or two too high, but many Notes too
high, and in their actions they are so forced, as the Spectators might very
easily believe the Actors would break their Sinew-strings; and in their Speech
they fetch their breath so short and thick, and in such painful fetches and
throws, as those Spectators that are Strangers, might verily believe that they
were gasping for life


But Lady, all know Love, which is the Theme or Subject of Plays, is a violent
passion, which forces the Players to an Elevation of Action and Speech


Most Reverend Matron, my opinion is, that though it be commendable and
admirable for the Poet to be elevated with a Poetical Divine Inspiration to
outdo Nature; yet for the Actors, their best grace is to Play or Act in the
Tracts or Paths of Nature, and to keep within Natures bounds; and whenever
they go awry, or transgress therefrom, they are to be condemned, and to be
accounted ill Actors; and as for the Passions of Love, certainly the strongest
Love is like the deepest Water, which is most silent, and least unnecessarily
active; they may sometimes murmur, with winds of sighs, but never roar; they
neither foam nor froth with violence, but are composed into a heavy body, with
a settled sadness: But in short, the Italian and French Players act more
Romantical than Natural, which is feigned and constrained: but to conclude with
the Poet, he delights the Ear and the Understanding with the variety of every
thing that Nature, has made, or Art invented; for a Poet is like a Be, that
gathers the sweet of every Flower, and brings the Honey to his Hive, which are
the Ears and Memory of the Hearers, or Readers, in whose Head his Wit swarms;
but as Painters Draw to the life, so Poets should Write to the life, and
Players Act to the life


The Academy of Ladies take no notice of the Academy of Men, nor seem to
consider what the men say, for they go on their own serious way, and edifying
discourses


At which the men are so angry, as they have sworn to leave off talking, and
instead thereof, they will sound Trumpets so loud, when the Ladys are in their
discoursings, as they shall not hear themselves speak; by which means they hope
to draw them out of their Cloister, as they swarm Bees; for as Bees gather
together at the sound of a Basin, Kettle, or such like metled thing: so they
will disperse that swarm of Academical Ladies, with the sound of brazen
Trumpets


Why the Ladies look through their Grate, upon the men, whilst the men are
speaking, and seem to listen to what they speak, as the men do on and to the
Ladies


That is true, but they take no notice of them in their literal Discourses, as
what the men have said; for they neither mention the men, nor their
Discoursings, or Arguments, or Academy, as if there were no such men


LAdy, let the Theme of your discourse be, at this time, of Vanity, Vice, and
Wickedness


There is a difference betwixt Vanity, Vice, and Wickedness: Wickedness is in
the will, Vice in the desires, and Vanity in the actions Will proceeds from the
Soul, Vice from the Appetites, and Action from Custom, or Practice; the Soul is
produced from the Gods, the Appetites created by Nature, and Custom is derived
from Time: As for Desires, we may desire, and not will, and we may will, and
not act, and we may act, and neither will, nor desire, and we may desire, will,
and act all at once; and to some particulars, we may neither desire, will nor
act; but the Will makes Vice Wickedness, and Vanity Vice; the willing of good,
proceeds from the Gods, the willing of evil proceeds from the Devils: so that
Sin is to will evil, in despite of good, and Piety is to will good, in
despite of evil, as neither the persuasions, nor temptations of the one, or
the other, shall draw our wills; for sin, or wickedness, is neither in the
Knowledge, nor Appetites: for if our Great Grandmother Eve, had not wilfully eat
of that which was strictly forbidden her, she had not sinned, for if that she
had only heard of the effects of that Fruit, or had desired it, yet had not
wilfully eaten thereof, she had never damned her Posterity: Thus, to will
against the Gods command, is Wickedness: but there is no such thing as
Wickedness, in Nature, but as I said Wickedness proceeds from the Soul, Vice
from the Appetites, and Vanity from the Actions: as for Wickedness, it is like
a dead Palsy, it has no sense, or feeling of the Grace or Goodness of the
Gods, and Vice is like an unwholesome Meat, cut out by the Appetites, for the
Appetites are like knives, whereas some are blunt, others are sharp, and as it
were, too much edged, but they are either blunt, of sharp, according as Nature
whets them: but if they be very sharp, as to be keen, they wound the body, and
make the life bleed. As for Vanity, it is as the froath of life, it is light,
and swims a-top, which bubbles out into extravagant and uprofitable actions,
false opinions, and idle, and impossible Imaginations. But as I said, it is not
the knowledge of Vanity, Vice and Wickedness, that makes a creature guilty
thereof, but the Will, and wilful Practice thereof, for Wickedness, Vice, and
Vanity, must be known as much as Piety, Virtue, and Discretion, otherwise men
may run into evil, through ignorance; wherefore it is as great a shame to
Education, not to be instructed in the bad, as it is a glory to be instructed
in the good: but the Question will be, whether Knowledge can be without a
partaking thereof? I Answer, not a perfect Knowledge, but a suppositive
Knowledge for there are many things which cannot be perfectly known, but
suppositively known: so we must only know Wickedness, Vice, and Vanity, as we
do know the Gods and Devils, which is by a lively Faith; so as we must be
instructed in all that is Pious, Virtuous, and Judicious, as we are instructed
of the Power and Goodness of the Gods; and we must be instructed in all that
is Wicked, Vicious, and Idle, as we are of the Evil, and Power of the Devils.
Now I must inform you, that there are three sorts of Knowledge, as a knowledge
of Possession, a knowledge of Action, and a knowledge of Declaration; the
knowledge of Action lies in the Appetites, the knowledge of Declaration lies in
the Senses, the knowledge of Possession in the Will, Action and Declarations.
As for example, we may hear, and see, Drunkenesse, Adultery, Murder, Theft,
and the like, and have no appetite to the same Actions; also we may have an
appetite to the same Actions, yet not a will to act the same; but if we have a
desire, and will act the same, we have, and are possessed with the most perfect
Knowledge thereof; but this last Knowledge is utterly unlawful in things that
are evil, but not in things that are good: But to conclude, we must be
instructed by a Narrative way, and by the intelligence of our ears, and eyes,
in that which is evil, as well, and as plainly, as in things that are good, not
to be ignorant in any thing that can be declared unto us, not staying until we
be Old, but to be thus instructed whilst we are young; for many that are young
Novices, commit many evils through ignorance, not being instructed, and
informed plainly and clearly, but darkly, and obscurely, caused by their
foolish, cautionary, formal Tutors, or Educators, who hold that erroneous
opinion, that Youth ought not to know such, or such Things, or Acts; which if
they had known, evil might have been prevented, and not left until their evil
be known by Practice; so that more evil is rather known by Practice, than
Declaration, or instruction of Information: but if our Senses are a guide to
our Reason, and our Reason a guide to our Understanding, and that the Reason
and Understanding governs our Appetites, then it is probable, our Sense, Reason,
and Understanding, may govern our Will


THis is not to be suffered: for if we should let these Ladies rest in peace
and quiet, in their enclosed Habitation, we shall have none but Old Women; for
all those young Ladies, that are not in the Academy, talk of nothing but of
going into a Female Academy


You say true, insomuch as it begins to be a Mode, and a Fashion, for all the
Youngest, Fairest, Richest, and Noblest Ladies, to enclose themselves into an
Academy


Nay, we must seek some way, and devise some means to unroost them.


There is nothing can do it, but noise; for they take such pleasure in the
exercise of their Tongues, that unless we can put them to silence, there is no
hopes to get them out


Trumpets, I doubt, will not be loud enough.


Let us try.


Content, Content, etc.


LAdy, let the Theme of your discourse be, at this time, of Boldness, and
Bashfulnesse


There are three sorts of Boldness, or Confidence, the one proceeds from
Custom, or Practice, as it may be observed by Preachers, Pleaders, and Players,
that can present themselves, speak, and act freely, in a public Assembly

The second sort of Boldness, or Confidence, proceeds from Ignorance, not
foreseeing what errors, or follies, may be committed, or chance to fall out, or
what is fittest to be done, or said; like as poor mean Country people, who
have neither Birth nor Breeding, have so much Confidence, as they can more
confidently present themselves, or presence, to those of Noble Birth and
Breeding, and can more freely, and boldly, talk to any Person, or Persons, of
what Quality, or Dignity soever, than those Noble Persons can talk to them

The third, and last sort of Confidence, or Boldness, proceeds from an
extraordinary Opinionatedness, or self-conceitednesse; for those that think, or
believe themselves to be above others, in Wit, Person, Parts, or Power,
although they have neither, will be most haughtily, and proudly confident,
scorning, and undervaluing all others, as inferior. Thus bold Confidence, or
confident Boldness, is produced from Practice, Ignorance, and Pride

Also there are three sorts of Bashfulnesse.

The one proceeds from too great an Apprehension.

The other from a poetical Fiction.

The third from an aspiring Ambition.

First, from too groat an Apprehension, as some are afraid that their
Observers, or Friends, should make an evil Construction of their good
Intentions. Others will be Bashful, and out of Countenance, upon a poetical
Fiction, as imagining of some impossible, or at least some improbable accident,
which may fall out to their disgrace. The third and last is, through an
aspiring Ambition, desiring to out-act all others in Excellencies, and fearing
to fail therein, is apt to be out of Countenance, as if they had received a
foyl; thus we may perceive that the Stream of good Nature, the peircing Beams
of Wit, and the Throne of Noble Ambition is the true cause of bashfulness, I
mean not shamefastness, but sweet bashfulnesse: but although bashfulnesse is a
sweet, tender, noble, and peircing Effect, of and from the Soul; yet
bashfulnesse is apt to unstring the Nerves, to weaken the Sinews, to dull the
Senses, to quench the Spirits, to blunt the eyes or points of Wit, and to
obstruct the Speech, insomuch as to cause the words to run stumblingly out of
the mouth, or to suffer none to pass forth: but a little Anger in the Mind
will take off the extreme bashfulnesse of the Behavior, although much Anger
does obstruct the Senses, Spirits and Speech, as much as extreme Bashfulnesse
does: for extreme anger, and extreme bashfulnesse, have often one and the same
Effects to outward Appearance


The Gentlemen will turn Trumpeters, for a Regiment of Gentlemen have bought
every one of them a Trumpet, to sound a March to the Academy of Ladies


Faith if the Ladies would answer their Trumpets with blowing of Horns, they
would serve them but as they ought to be setved


Women will sooner make Horns, than blow Horns.


Lady, let the Theme of your discourse at this time be of Virtuous Courtships,
and wooing Suitors


Some Poetical and Romantical Writers make valiant gallant Heroicks woo
poorly, sneakingly, and pedlingly


Lady, let me interrupt you; would you have gallant Heroicks in their
Courtships to Fair young Ladies, as Commanding as in the Field, or as Furious
as in a Battle


No, I would have them woo with a Confident Behavior, a Noble Demeanor, a
Generous Civility, and not to be amazed or to tremble for fear, to weep for
pity, to kneel for mercy, to sigh and be dejected with a Mistresses frown; for
though sorrow, sighs, ^ears and Humility become all Heroic Spirits very well,
and express a Noble and Generous Soul, yet not in such a cause: for tears
become all Heroic Spirits, for the Death or Torments of Friends, or for the
sufferances of Innocents, or Virtue, yet not if only themselves were tormented,
or to dye, or^ for any misfortune that could come upon our own Persons or
estates, or for any obstructions to their own pleasures or delights, but it
becomes all Heroic Spirits, to tremble for fear of their Honor, or loss of
their Fame, and expresses a generous Soul to grieve and to mourn in a general
Calamity, and to humble themselves to the Gods for those in distress, and to
implore and kneel to them for mercy, both for themselves and others, as for to
divert the wrath of the Gods; but not to weep, sigh, tremble, kneel, pray, for
their Effeminate pleasures, delights, or Societies; nor to grieve or sorrow for
the loss of the same

Also some VVriters, when they are to describe a Bashful and Modest Lady, such
as are Nobly and Honorably bred, describe them as if they were simply
shame-faced; which description makes such appear, as if they came merely from
the Milk-boul, and had been bred only with silly Huswives, and that their
practice was, to pick Worms from Roots of Flowers, and their pastimes to carry
and fling crumbs of Bread to Birds, or little Chickens that were hatched by
their Hens their Mothers gave them, or to gather a lapfull of sweet Flowers, to
Distill a little sweet Water to dip their Hankerchiefs in, or to wash their
Faces in a little Rose Water; and indeed, this harmless and innocent Breeding,
may be Modest and Bashful, or rather shame-faced, for want of other
Conversation, which Custom and Company will soon cast off, or wear out, and
then print Boldness on their brow; but true modest Souls, which have for the
most part Bashful Countenances, proceed^ from a deep Apprehension, a clear
Understanding, an ingenuous Wit, a thinking Brain, a pure Mind, a resined
Spirit, a Noble Education, and not from an ignorant obscure Breeding; for it is
not Ignorance that makes Modesty, but Knowledge, nor is it Guiltiness that
makes Bashfulnesse, but fear of those that are guilty; but as I said, many
VVriters that would make a description of Modest and Bashful women, mistake
and express a shame-faced Ignorance and obscure Breeding; and instead of
expressing a young Lady to be innocent of Faults, they express her to be one
that is ignorant of Knowledge, so as when they would describe a Modest,
Bashful, Innocent Virgin, they mistake and describe a simple ignorant shame
faced Maid, that either wants Breeding or Capacity


But Lady, let me ask you one question, would you have a young Virgin as
confident and knowing as a Married Wise


Yes, although not in their Behavior or Condition of life, but in her Virtue
and Constancy; for a chaste Married wife is as Modest and Bashful as a Virgin,
though not so simple, ignorant, and shame-faced as a plain bred Maid; but as I
said, VVriters should describe the wooing of gallant Heroicks, or Great and
Noble Persons, to woo with a Generous Confidence, or Manly Garb, a Civil
Demeanor, a Rational Discourse, to an honest Design, and to a Virtuous end, and
not with a whining Voice, in pitiful words, and fawning Language; and if it
be only for a Mistress, as for a Courtezan, Bribes are the best Advocates, or
to employ others to treat with them, and not to be the Pimp, although for
themselves

Also VVriters should when they describe Noble Virgins, to receive Noble
Addresses of Love, and to receive those Noble Addresses or Courtships with an
attentive Modesty in a bashful Countenance; and if to tremble for fear, to
describe the fear, as being the Nature of the Sex; also to describe their
Behavior after a Noble Garb, and their answers to their Suitors, to be full of
Reason, Sense, and Truth, and those answers to be delivered in as short
discourses, and as few words as Civility will allow of, and not like an
ignorant innocent, a childish simplicity, an unbred Behavior, expressing
themselves, or answering their Suitors with mincing words that have neither
Sense nor Reason in them

Also Poetical and Romantical VVriters should not make great Princes that have
been bred in great and populous Cities, glorious Camps; and splendrous Courts,
to woo and make Love like private bred men, or like rude bred Clowns, or like
mean bred Servants, or like Scholars, that woo by the Book in Scholastical
Terms or Phrases, or to woo like flanting, ranting, swearing, bragging
Swaggerers, or Rusters; or to woo a Country wench, like as a Noble Lady, or
great Princess

Also not to make such women as have been bred and born Nobly and Honorably,
to receive the Courtship of great Persons, like a Dairy-maid, Kitchin-maid, or
like such as have been bred in mean Cottages, as to behave themselves simply,
or rudely, as to the answer and speak Crossingly, or Thwartingly, as
contradicting every word that is spoken unto them, as if they did believe what
they said was not truth; for Civil and Honorable bred women, who have Noble
and Generous Souls, will rather seem to believe all their Superlative Praises,
than make Doubts, as if they knew they lied; for to make Doubts, is in the
midway to give the Lie


Lady, how approve you of those Lovers that kiss the Letters, Tokens, Pledges,
and the like, that are sent unto them from their Lovers? or such as wear
Letters, Tokens, or Pledges in their Bosoms, and next their Heart, and take
them and view them a hundred times a day


Approve it say you? you mean disapprove it; but let me tell you, most Reverend
Matron, that the very hearing of it makes the sick, and the seeing of it would
make me die

I have so great an Aversion against such actions, for those actions: like as
whining Speeches, proceed from filthy Amorous Love, and Mean Lovers; for true
Love in Noble Persons, receives gifts as an expression of their Suitors, or
Lovers Loves, and will carefully keep them as an acknowledgment of the receipt,
and accept of them as a great Seal to their affections; yet they keep such
Presents, but as Treasurers, not as Owners, until they be man and wife;
neither do they make Idols of such gifts, nor do they adore the Owner the more
for the gift, nor the gist for the Owner; nor do they think fit they ought to
give such outward expressions of Love, by such useless actions, when as htey
have a high esteem of their Suitors Love, a perfect belief of their Merit, and a
constant return of their affection, and a resolution to dye, or suffer any
misery for their sakes if need required; besides, true Lovers have ever the
Idea of their beloved in their Thoughts, by which they cannot forget their
Memory, indeed Love Letters they may read often, because Letters are an
enjoyment of their discourse, although their persons be at a distance, and are
also a recreation and delight in their Wits, if there be any Wit th^rein, but
to kiss the Paper, they neither find pleasure, delight, non profit, neither to
themselves, nor to their Beloved; the truth is, not one Writer amongst a
thousand make Lovers woo either wisely, wittily, nobly, eloquently, or
naturally; but either foolishly, meanly, unmanly, unhandsomely, or amorously,
which is corruptly


Lady, you say very true, and some Romantical Writers, make long and tedious
Orations, or long and tedious and fruitless discourse, in such times as
requires sudden action


You say right, as to speak when they a^e to fight; but for my part I hate to
read Romances, or some Scenes in Plays, whose ground or Foundation is Amorous
Love


When you read such Books, you must never consider the Subject that the
Writer writes on, but consider the Wit, Language, Fancy, or Description


Most Reverend Sister, I suppose few read Romances, or the like Books, but for
the Wit, Fancy, Judgment, and lively Descriptions; for they do not read such
Books, as they do read Chronicles, wherein is only to be considered the true
Relation of the History


Most Grave and Wife Matronesse, I believe though none read Romances, or such
like Books, whose ground is seigned Love, and Lovers, as they read Chronicles,
whose ground should be unfeigned Truth; yet certainly, few read Romances or the
like Books, either for the Wit, Fancy, Judgment or Descriptions, but to feed
their Amorous Humou^s on their Amorous Discourses, and to tune their Voice to
their Amorous Strains of Amorous Love; for it is to be observed, that those
Books that are most Amorously penned, are most often read


May it please your Worships, there is an Ancient Gentlewoman that desires to
speak with your Worships


I lay my life it is one of the Matrons of the Academy.


Faith if the Humble Be is flown out, the rest of the Bees will follow.


I fear if they do, they will swarm about our Ears.


Yes, and sting us with their Tongues.


Let us send for her in.


I will go and Usher her in.


Gentlemen, the Ladies of the Academy have sent me unto you, to know the Reason
or Cause that you will not let them rest in qniet, or suffer them to live in
peace, but disturb them in both, by a confused noise of Trumpets, which you
uncivilly and discourteously blow at their Grate and Gates


The cause is, that they will not permit us to come into their Company, but
have barricadoed their Gats against us, and have incloystred themselves from
us; besides, it is a dangerous example for all the rest of their Sex; for if
all women should take a toy in their heads to incloyster themselves, there
would be none left out to breed on


Surely it is very fit and proper that young Virgins should live a retired
life, both for their Education and Reputation


As for their Education, it is but to learn to talk, and women can do that
without teaching, for on my Conscience, a woman was the first inventer of
Speech; and as for their Retirement, Nature did never make them for that
purpose, but to associate themselves with men: and since men are the chief Head
of their kind, it were a sign they had but very little Brain, if they would
suffer the youngest and fairest women to incloyster themselves


Gentlemen pray give me leave to inform you, for I perceive you are in great
Error of mistake, for these Ladies have not vowed Virginity, or are they
incloystred; for an Academy is not a Cloister, but a School, wherein are taught
how to be good Wives when they are married


But no man can come to woo them to be Wives.


No, but if they can win their Parents, or those they are left in trust with,
and get their good liking and consent, the young Ladies have learned so much
Duty and Obedience, as to obey to what they shall think fit


But we desire the Ladies good liking, we care not for their Friends; for the
approvment and good liking of their Friends, without the Love of the Ladies,
will not make us happy, for there is no satisfaction in a secondary Love, as to
be beloved for another sake, and not for their own


If you be Worthy Gentlemen, as I believe you all are, their Love will be due
to your Merits, and your Merits will persuade them to love you


Well, if you will be our Mediator, we will surcease our Clamor, otherwise we
will increase our noise


If you can get leave of their Parents, and Friends, I will endeavor to serve
you, and shall be proud of the employment that you shall be pleased to impose
to my trust and management


And we shall be your Servants, for your favors.



