You hear how this Kingdom of Reformation is prepaparing for War against the
Kingdom of Faction


Yea, for I hear the Kingdom of Faction resolves to War with this Kingdom of
Reformation


It Is true, for there are great preparations of either side, men are raised of
all sorts and ages fit to bear Arms, and of all degrees to command and obey,
and there is one of the gallantest and noblest persons in this Kingdom, which
is made General to command in chief, for he is a man that is both valiant and
well experienced in Wars, temperate and just in Peace, wise and politic in
public affairs, careful and prudent in his own Family, and a most generous
person


Indeed I have heard that he is a most excellent Soldier.


He is so, for he is not one that sets forth to the Wars with great resolutions
and hopes, and returns with maskerd fears, and despairs; neither is he like
those that take more care, and are more industrious to get gay Clothes, and
fine Feathers, to flant in the Field, and vapor in their march, than to get
useful and necessary provision; but before he will march, he will have all
things ready, and proper for use, as to fit himself with well-tempered Arms,
which are light to be worn, yet musket proof; for he means not to run away, nor
to yield his life upon easy terms unto his Enemy; for he desires to Conquer,
and not vain-gloriously to show his courage by a careless neglect or a vain
carelessness; also he chooses such Horses as are useful in War, such as have
been made subject to the hand and heel, that have been taught to Trot on the
Hanches, to change, to Gallop, to stop, and such Horses as have spirit and
strength, yet quiet and sober Natures; he regards more the goodness of the
Horses than the Colors or marks, and more the fitness of his Saddles than the
Imbrodery; also he takes more care that his Wagons should be easy to follow,
and light in their carriage, than to have them painted and gilded; and he takes
greater care that his Tents should be made, so as to be suddenly put up, and as
quickly pulled down, than for the setting and Imbrodering his Arms thereupon;
also he take more care to have useful Servants than numerous Servants; and as
he is industrious and careful for his particular affairs, so he is for the
general affairs


A good Soldier makes good preparations, and a good General does both for
himself and Army, and as the General has showed himself a good Soldier by the
preparations he had made to march, so he has showen himself a wise man by the
settlement he has made, in what he has to leave behind him; for I hear he
has settled and ordered his House and Family


He has so, and he has a fair young and virtuous Lady that he must leave
behind him, which cannot choose but trouble him


The wisest man that is, cannot order or have all things to his own contentment.


My dear heart, you know I am commanded to the Wars, and had I not such Wife as
you are, I should have thought Fortune had done me a favor to employ my life
in Heroical Actions for the service of my Country, or to give me a honorable
Death, but to leave you is such a Cross as my Nature sinks under; but
wheresoever you are there will be my life, I shall only carry a Body which may
sight, but my Soul and all the powers thereof will remain with thee


Husband, I shall take this expression of love but for feigning words, if you
leave me; for it is against Nature to part with that we love best, unless it be
for the beloveds preservation, which cannot be mine, for my life lives in
yours, and the comfort of that life in your Company


I know you love me so well, as you had rather part with my life than I should
part from my honor


It Is true, my love persuades me so to do, knowing fame is a double life, as
infamy is a double death; nay I should persuade you to those actions, were they
never so dangerous, were you unwilling thereunto, or could they create a world
of honor, fully inhabited with praises; but I would not willingly part with
your life for an imaginary or supposed honor, which dies in the womb before it
is Born; thus I love you the best, preferring the best of what is yours; but I
am but in the second place in your affections, for you prefer your honor
before me; it is true, it is the better choice, but it shows I am not the best
beloved, which makes you follow and glue to that and leave me


Certainly Wife my honor is your honor, and your honor will be buried in my
disgrace, which Heaven avert; for I prefer yours before my own, insomuch as I
would have your honor to be the Crown of my glory


Then I must partake of your actions, and go along with you.


What to the Wars?


To any place where you are.


But Wife you consider not, as that long marches, ill lodgings, much watching,
cold nights, scorching days, hunger and danger are ill Companions for Ladies,
their acquaintance displeases; their conversation is rough and rude, being too
boisterous for Ladies; their tender and strengthless constitutions cannot
encounter nor grapell therewith


It Is said, that Love overcomes all things: in your Company long marches will
be but as a breathing walk, the hard ground feel as a Feather-Bed, and the
starry Sky a spangled Canopy, hot days a Stove to cure cold Agues, hunger as
Fasting days or an eve to devotion, and danger is honors triumphant Chariot


But Nature has made women like China, or Pursleyn, they must be used gently,
and kept warily, or they will break and fall on Deaths head: besides, the
inconveniences in an Army are so many, as put patience her self out of humor;
besides, there is such inconveniences as modesty cannot allow of


There is no immodestly in natural effects, but in unnatural abuses; but
contrive it as well as you can, for go I must, or either I shall dye, or
dishonor you; for if I stay behind you, the very imaginations of your danger
will torture me, sad Dreams will affright me, every little noise will sound as
your passing Bell, and my fearful mind will transform every object like as
your pale Ghost, until I am smothered in my Sighs, shrouded in my Tears, and
buried in my Griefs; for whatsoever is joined with true love, will dye
absented, or else their love will dye, for love and life are joined together;
as for the honor of constancy, or constant fidelity, or the dishonor of
inconstancy, the lovingest and best wife in all story that is recorded to be,
the most perfectest and constantest wife in her Husbands absence was Penelope,
Ulysses wife, yet she did not Barricado her Ears from Loves soft Alarums; but
parled and received Amorous Treaties, and made a Truce until she and her
Lovers could agree and conclude upon conditions, and questionless there were
Amorous Glances shot from loving Eyes of either party; and though the Siege of
her Chastity held out, yet her Husbands Wealth and Estate was impoverished, and
great Riots committed both in his Family and Kingdom, and her Suitors had
absolute power thereof; thus though she kept the fort of her Chastity, she lost
the Kingdom, which was her Husbands Estate and Government, which was a
dishonor both to her and her Husband; so if you let me stay behind you, it
will be a thousand to one but either you will lose me in Death, or your honor
in Life, where if you let me go you will save both; for if you will consider
and reckon all the married women you have heard or read of, that were absented
from their Husbands, although upon just and necessary occasions, but had some
Ink of aspersions flung upon them, although their wives were old, illfavoured,
decrepid and diseased women, or were they as pure as light, or as innocent as
Heaven; and wheresoever this Ink of aspersions is thrown, it sticks so fast,
that the spots are never rubbed out, should it fall on Saints, they must wear
the marks as a Badge of misfortunes, and what man had not better be thought or
called an uxorious Husband, than to be despised and laughed at, as being but
thought a Cuckhold? the first only expresses a tender and noble Nature, the
second sounds as a base, cowardly, poor, dejected, forsaken Creature; and as
for the immodesty you mentioned, there is none, for there can be no breach of
modesty, but in unlawful actions, or at least unnecessary ones; but what Law
can warrant, and necessity does enforce, is allowable amongst men, pure before
Angels, Religious before Gods, when unchosing persons, improper places, unfit
times, condemn those actions that are good in themselves, make them appear base
to men, hateful to Angels, and wicked to Gods, and what is more lawful,
fitting, and proper, than for a man and wife to be inseparable together


Well, you have used so much Rhetoric to persuade, as you have left me none to
deny you, wherefore I am resolved you shall try what your tender Sex can
endure; but I believe when you hear the Bullets fly about you, you will wish
your self at home, and repent your rash adventure


I must prove false first, for love does give me courage.


Then come along, I shall your courage try.


He follow you, though in Deaths Arms I ly.


Well met, for I was going to thy lodging to call thee to make up the Company
of good fellows, which has appointed a meeting


Faith you must go with the odd number, or get another in my room, for I am
going about some affairs which the Lord General has employed me in


I perceive by thee that public employments spoil private meetings.


You say right, for if every one had good employment, vice would be out of
fashion


What do you call vice?


Drinking, Wenching, and Gaming.


As for two of them, as Drinking and Wenching, especially Wenching, no
employment can abolish them, no, not the most severest, devotest, nor
dangerest: for the Statesman Divines, and Soldiers, which are the most and
greatest employed, will leave all other affairs to kiss a Mistress


But you would have me go to a Tavern and not to a Mistress.


Why, you may have a Mistress in a Tavern if you please.


Well, if my other affairs will give me any leisure, I will come to you.


The Lord General was accounted a discreet and wise man, but he shows but
little wisdom in this action of carrying his wife along with him to the Wars,
to be a Clog at his heels, a Chain to his hands, an Incumberance in his march,
obstruction in his way; for she will be always puling and sick, and whining,
and crying, and tired, and ^roward, and if her Dog should be left in any place,
as being forgotten, all the whole Army must make a halt whilst the Dog is
fetched, and Trooper after Trooper must be sent to bring intelligence of the
Dogs coming, but if there were such a misfortune that the Dog could not be
found, the whole Army must be dispersed for the search of it, and if it should
be lost, then there must seem to be more lamentation for it than if the Enemy
had given us an entire defeat, or else we shall have frowns instead of
preferments


The truth is, I wonder the General will trouble himself with his wife, when it
is the only time a married man has to enjoy a Mistress without jealousy, a
spritely sound wench, that may go along without trouble, with bag and baggage,
to wash his linen, and make his sield Bed, and attend to his call, when a wife
requires more attendance than Centries to watch the Enemy


For my part I wonder as much that any man should be so fond of his wife as to
carry her with him; for I am only glad of the Wars, because I have a good
pretense to leave my wife behind me; besides an Army is a quiet, solitary
place, and yields a man a peaceable life compared to that at home: for what
with the faction and mutiny amongst his Servants, and the noise the women make,
for their tongues like as an Alarm beat up quaters in every Corner of the
House, that a man can take no rest; besides every day he has a set Battle with
his wife, and from the Army of her angry thoughts, she sends forth such vollies
of words with her Gunpowder anger, and the fire of her fury, as breaks all the
ranks and files of content, and puts happiness to an utter rout, so as for my
part I am forced to run away in discontent, although some Husbands will stay,
and fight for the Victory


Gentlemen, Gentlemen^ pray condemn not a man for taking his lawful delight,
or for ordering his private affairs to his own humor, every man is free to
himself, and to what is his, as long as he disturbs not his Neighbors, nor
breaks the Peace of the Kingdom, nor disorders the Commonwealth, but submits
to the Laws, and obeys the Magistrates without dispute; besides Gentlemen, it is
no crime nor wonder, for a man to let his wife go along with him when he goes
to the Wars, for there has been examples; for Pompey had a wife with him, and
so had Germanicus, and so had many great and worthy Heroicks, and as for
Alexander the great he had a wife or two with him; besides, in many Nations men
are not only desired, but commanded by the Chiefs to let their wives go with
them, and it has been a practice by long Custom, for women to be spectators
in their Battles, to encourage their fights, and so give fire to their Spirits;
also to attend them in their Sicknesses, to cleanse their wounds, to dress their
meat; and who is fitter than a wife? what other woman will be so lovingly
careful, and industriously helpful as a wife? and if the Greeks had not left
their wives behind them, but had carried them along to the Trojan Wars, they
would not have found such disorders as they did at their return, nor had such
bad welcome home, as witness Agamemnons; besides, there have been many women
that have not only been Spectators, but Actors, leading Armies, and directing
Battles with good success, and there have been so many of these Heroicks, as it
would be tedious at this time to recount; besides the examples of women's
courage in Death, as also their wise conduct, and valiant actions in Wars are
many, and pray give me leave to speak without your being offended thereat, it
is not Noble, nor the part of a Gentleman, to censure, condemn, or dispraise
another man's private actions, which nothing concerns him, especially when there
is so gallant a subject to discourse of as the discipline and actions of these
Wars we are entering into


In Troth Sir, you have instructed us so well, and have chid us so handsomely,
as we are sorry for our error, and ask pardon for our fault, and our
repentance shall be known by that we will never censure so again


I have heard our Generals Lady goes with the General her Husband to the Wars,
wherefore I think it fit for the rest of the Commanders, if it were only for
policy, to let our General see that we approve of his actions so well, as to
imitate him in ours, carrying our Wives along with us, besides the Generals
Lady cannot chose but take it kindly to have our Wives wait upon her, wherefore
Wife it is fit you should go


Alas Husband I am so tender, that I am apt to catch cold if the least puff of
wind do but blow upon me; wherefore to ly in the open Fields will kill me the
first Night, if not, the very journey will shatter my small bones to pieces


Why, our Generals Lady is a very fine young Lady, and she ventures to go.


There let her venture, for you must excuse me, for I will stay at home, go you
where you please


Well Wife consider it.


Wife prepare your self to follow the Army, for it is now the fashion for
Wives to march, wherefore pack up and away


What with a Knapsack behind me as your Trull? not I, for I will not disquiet
my rest with inconveniences, nor divert my pleasures with troubles, nor be
affrighted with the roaring Cannons, nor endanger my life with every Potgun, nor
be frozen up with Cold, nor stewed to a gelly with heat, nor be powdered up
with dust, until I come to be as dry as a Neats-tongue; besides, I will not
venture my Complexion to the wroth of the Sun, which will tan me like a Sheeps
skin


Faith Wife, if you will not go, I will have a Landery-Maid to ride in my
VVaggon, and ly in my Tent


Prithee Husband take thy Kitching Maid along too, for she may have as much
Grease about her as will serve to make Soap to wash your Linen with, and while
you ride with your Landery-Maid in your Wagon, I will ride with my
Gentleman Usher in my Coach


Why Wife, it is out of love that I would have thee go.


And it is out of love that I will stay at home; besides, do you think I mean to
follow your Generals Lady as a common Trooper does a Commander, to feed upon
her reversions, to wait for her favor, to watch for a smile; no, no, I will be
Generalissimo my self at home, and distribute my Colors to be carried in the
Hats of those that will fight in my quarrel, to keep or gain the Victory of my
favor and love


So I may chance to be a Cuckhold before I return home.


You must trust to Fortune for that, and so I wish you a good Journey.


I cannot choose but take it unkindly that you will go without me; do you
mistrust my affection? as that I have not as much love for you as the Generals
Lady has for her Husband; or do you desire to leave me? because you would take
a Mistress along with you, one that perchance has more Beauty than you think
me to have; with whom you may securely, and freely sit in your Tent, and gaze
upon; or one that has more wit than I, whose sweet, smooth, and flattering
words may charm your thoughts, and draw your Soul out of your ears to sit upon
her Lips, or dancing with delight upon her Tongue


Prithee Wife be not jealous, I vow to Heaven no other Beauty can attract my
eyes but thine, nor any sound can please my brain, but what thy charming Tongue
sends in; besides, I prise not what thy Body is, but how thy Soul's adorned,
thy virtue would make me think thee fair, although thou were deformed, and
wittier far than Mercury, had thou Midas's ears, but thou have all that man
can wish of women kind, and that is the reason I will leave thee safe at home;
for I am loath to venture all my wealth and happiness in Fortunes unconstant
Bark, suffering thy tender youth and Sex to float on the rough waves of chance,
where dangers like to Northern winds blow high, and who can know but that fatal
gusts may come, and overwhelm thee, and drown all my joys? wherefore for my
sake keep thy self safe at home


I shall obey you, but yet I think it were not well I should be a long time
from you, and at a great distance


I will promise you, if I perceive the War is like to be prolonged, and that
there be Garrison-Towns so safe as you may securely live in, I will send for
you, placing you so where sometimes I may visit you


Pray do not forget me so much as to cancel your promise.


Forget the sweet? I should sooner forget life, and if I do whilst I have
memory, Heaven forget me


I must ask you a question, which is to know why you will take an under
command, being so nobly Born, and bearing a high Title of Honor your self, and
being Master of a great Estate


To let the World see my Courage is above my Birth, Wealth, or Pride, and that
I prefer inward worth before outward Title, and I had rather give my life to
the Enemy on honorable terms, than basely to stay at home in time of general
Wars, out of an ambitious discontent: for valor had rather have dangers to
sight with, than Offices to command in


Why should you go to the Wars now you are in years, and not so fit for action
as those that are young, and have their strengths about them? besides, we have
lived a married pair above these thirty years, and never parted, and shall we
now be separated when we are old


Alas Wife, what would you have me do? when I am commanded out I must obey;
besides, I would not have my Country fight a Batrel whilst I live, and I not
make one, for all the World, for when I cannot fight, my Body shall serve to
stop a breach; wherefore leave your crying Wife, and fall to praying for our
safe return, and here my noble friend is desirous you should stay with his Lady
to comfort one another, and to divert Melancholy and the longing hours of our
return


Farewell, I fear I shall never see you again, for your absence will soon kill
me


O you are welcome from the Army, what news?


Why our Army marched until they came unto the frontiers of the Kingdom,
where they found the Army of the Enemy ready to encounter them, the Lord
General seeing they must of necessity fight a Battle, thought best to call a
Council of War, that there might be nothing of ill conduct laid to his
chardge, but that all might be ordered by a wise and experienced Council,
whereupon he made an election of Counselors, joining together three sorts, as
grave, wife, and prudent men, subtle and politic men, and valiant, skillfull,
martial men, that the cold temper of the prudent, might allay the hot temper
of the valiant, and that the politic might be as ingenious to serve them
together by subtle devises, and to make traps of Stragems to catch in the
Enemy, and at this Council many debates there were, but at last they did
conclude a Battle must be fought; but first they did decree that all the women
should be sent into one of their Garrison Towns, some two days journey from
the Army, the reasons were, that if they should be overcome by their Enemies,
the women might be taken by their Enemies, and made Slaves, using or abusing
them as they pleased; but when the women were sent away, they did not shed
tears of sorrow, but sent such vollies of angry words, as wounded many men's
hearts; but when they were almost at the Town that was to be their abode, the
Generals Lady, was so extremely incensed against the Counselors, by reason
they decreed her departure with the others, as she strove to raise up the
Spirits of the rest of her Sex to the height of her own; but what the issue
will be I know not


Have you been with the King?


Yes, I was sent to give him an account of the Army.


Most Heroical Spirits of most chaste and loving Wives, Mistrisses, Sisters,
Children or Friends, I know you came not from your several Houses and homes
into this Army merely to enjoy your Husbands, Lovers, Parents and Friends in
their safe and secure Garrisons, or only to share of their troublesome and
tedious marches, but to venture also in their dangerous and cruel Battles, to
run their Fortunes, and to force Destiny to join you to their Periods; but the
Masculine Sex has separated us, and cast us out of their Companyes, either out
of their loving care and desire of preserving our lives and liberties, lest we
might be distroyed in their confusions, or taken Prisoners in their loss, or
else it must be out of jealousy we should Eclipse the fame of their valors
with the splendour of our constancy; and if it be Love, let us never give the
pre-eminence, for then we should lose that Prerogative that belongs to the
Crown of our Sex; and if it be thorough Jealous mistrust of their Fame, it were
poor for us to submit and quit that unto men, that men will not unto us, for
Fame makes us like the Gods, to live for ever; besides, those women that have
staid at home will laugh at us in our return, and their effeminate Lovers and
Carpet Knights, that Cowardly and Luxuriously Coin excuses to keep and stay
them from the Wars, will make Lampons of us for them to sing of our disgrace,
saying, our Husbands, Lovers, and Friends were so weary of us, as they were
forced to take that pretense of affectionate love to be rid of our Companyes;
wherefore if you will take my advise, let us return, and force those that sent
us away to consent that we shall be partakers with them, and either win them by
persuasions, or lose our selves by breaking their decrees; for it were better
we should die by their angry frowns, than by the Tongue of Infamy


Let us return, let us return.


Noble Heroickesses, I am glad to hear you speak all as with one voice and
Tongue, which shows your minds are joined together, as in one piece, without
seam or rent; but let us not return unfit to do them service, so we may cause
their ruin by obstruction, which will wound us more than can their anger;
wherefore let us strive by our industry to render our selves useful to their
service


Propound the way, and set the Rules, and we will walk in the one, and keep
strictly to the other


Then thus, we have a Body of about five or six thousand women, which came
along with some thirty thousand men, but since we came, we are not only thought
unusefull, but troublesome, which is the reason we were sent away, for the
Masculine Sex is of an opinion we are only fit to breed and bring forth
Children, but otherwise a trouble in a Commonwealth, for though we increase
the Commonwealth by our breed, we encomber it by our weakness, as they think,
as by our incapacities, as having no ingenuity for Inventions, nor subtle wit
for Politicians; nor prudence for direction, nor industry for execution; nor
patience for opportunity, nor judgment for Counselors, nor secrecy for trust;
nor method to keep peace, nor courage to make War, nor strength to defend our
selves or Country, or to assault an Enemy; also that we have not the wisdom to
govern a Commonwealth, and that we are too partial to sit in the Seat of
Justice, and too pitiful to execute rigorous Authority when it is needful,
and the reason of these erroneous opinions of the Masculine Sex to the
Effeminate, is, that our Bodies seem weak, being delicate and beautiful, and
our minds seem fearful, being compassionate and gentle natured, but if we were
both weak and fearful, as they imagine us to be, yet custom which is a second
Nature will encourage the one and strengthen the other, and had our educations
been answerable to theirs, we might have proved as good Soldiers and Privy
Counselors, Rulers and Commanders, Navigators and Architectors, and as learned
Sholars both in Arts and Sciences, as men are; for Time and Custom is the
Father and Mother of Strength and Knowledge, they make all things easy and
facil, clear and prospitious; they bring acquaintance, and make friendship of
every thing; they make Courage and Fear, Strength and Weakness, Difficulty and
Facility, Dangers and Securities, Labors and Recreations, Life and Death, all
to take and shake as it were hands together; wherefore if we would but
accustom our selves we may do such actions, as may gain us such a reputation,
as men might change their opinions, insomuch as to believe we are fit to be
Copartners in their Governments, and to help to rule the World, where now we
are kept as Slaves forced to obey; wherefore let us make our selves free,
either by force, merit, or love, and in order, let us practice and endeavor,
and take that which Fortune shall profer unto us, let us practice I say, and
make these Fields as Schools of Martial Arts and Sciences, so shall we become
learned in their disciplines of War, and if you please to make me your
Tutoress, and so your Generalless, I shall take the power and command from your
election and Authority, otherwise I shall most willingly, humbly, and
obediently submit to those whom you shall choose


You shall be our Generalless, our Instructeress, Ruler and Commanderess, and
we will every one in particular, swear to obey all your Commands, to submit and
yield to your punishments, to strive and endeavor to merit your rewards


Then worthy Heroickesses, give me leave to set the Laws and Rules I would have
you keep and observe, in a brass Tablet


We agree and consent to whatsoever you please.


How painful is true love absented from what is loved, it is strange that that
which pleases most should be the greatest torment


What, all times walking by your self alone? when your Lord returns I will
complain, and tell him what dull Company you are


I hope I shall not be from him so long, for he promised to send for me.


Nay faith, when you go, as old as I am, I will travel with you to see my
Husband too


You will be so much the more welcome, by how much you were unexpected.


You look pale on the sudden, are not you well?


Yes, only on a sudden I had a chill of cold that seized on my Spirits.


Beshrew me, their coldness has nipt the blood out of your Cheeks and Lips.


If they had been painted, they would have kept their Color.


Noble Heroicks, these are the Laws our Generalless has caused to be inscribed
and read for every one to observe and keep

First, Be it known, observed and practiced, that no woman that is able to bear
Arms, shall go unarmed, having Arms to wear, but shall wear them at all times,
but when they put them off to change their linen; they shall Sleep, Eat and
Rest, and march with them on their Bodies


Give me leave Noble Heroicks to declare the reason of this Law or Command, as
to wear an Iron or Steel Habit, and to be so constantly worn, is, that your
Arms should not feel heavy, or be troublesome or painful for want of use, as
they will be when you shall have an occasion to put them on; and certainly, for
want of practice, more Masculine Soldiers are overcome by their Arms, than by
their Enemies, for the unaccustomedness makes them so unwieldy, as they can
neither defend themselves, nor assault their Foes, whereas Custom will make
them feel as light, as their Skins on their Flesh, or their Flesh on their
Bones, nay Custom has that force, as they will feel as if their Bodies were
Naked, when as their Arms are off, and as Custom makes the Cold and peircing
Air to have no power over the naked Bodies of men, for in cold Countries as
well as hot, men have been accustomed to go naked, and have felt no more harm,
nor so much, by the cold, than those that are warmly Clothed, so Custom will
make your Arms seem as light as if you had none on, when for want of use their
weight will seem heavy, their several pieces troublesome and incombersome, as
their Gorg^ts will seem to press down their Shoulders, their Back and
Breast-plates and the rest of the several pieces to cut their waste, to pinch
their Body, to bind their Thighs, to ty their Arms, and their Headpiece to
hinder their breath, to darken their sight, and to stop their hearing, and all
for want of ^se and Custom; but enough of this, read on


Secondly, Be it known, observed and practiced, that every Company must watch
by turns, whether they have Enemies near or no, and at all times, and whosoever
Drinks any thing but Water, or Eats any thing but Bread, all the time they are
on the watch shall be punished with fasting


Give me leave to declare the reason of this Law, the reason is, that strong
Drinks, and nourishing meats send many vapors to the Brain, which vapors are
like several Keys, which lock up the Senses so fast, as neither loud noises,
bright lights, nor strong sents can enter either at the Ears, Eyes, or
Nostrils, insomuch as many times their Enemies send Death to break them asunder


Thirdly, Be it known, observed and practiced, that none of the Troopers march
over Corn Fields if it can be avoided, unless the Enemy should be behind, and
then the more spoil the better


The reason of this is, that it were a great imprudence to destroy through a
careless march of Horse and Foot, that which would serve to feed and nourish us
in the Winter time, and in our Winter Quarters, when it is laid in the Barns
and Granaries, by the labor and the industry of the Farmers


Fourthly, Be it known, observed and practiced, that none shall plunder those
things which are weighty of carriage, unless it be for safety or necessity


The reason is of this, that all that is heavy in the carriage is a hindrance
in our march


Fifthly, Be it known, observed and practiced, that no Soldiers shall play at
any Game for money or drink, but only for meat to eat


The reason of this is, that those that play for drink, the winners will be
drunk, and those that are drunk are unfit for service; besides, many disorders
are caused by drunkenness; and to play for money, the losers grow Choleric,
and quarrels proceed therefrom, which quarrels many times cause great mutinies
through their side taking, and factious parties, besides, having lost their
money and not their Appetites, they become weak and faint for want of that
nourishing food, their money should get them, having nothing left to buy them
victuals withal; besides, it forces them to forage further about, where by
straggling far from the body of the Army, they are subject to be caught by the
Enemy, but when they play for meat their winnings nourish their Bodies, making
them strong and vigorous, and when their Appetites are satisfied, and their
Stomachs are filled, their humors are pleasant, and their minds courageous;
besides, it is the Nature of most Creatures, either to distribute or at least
to leave the remaining pieces to the next takers, so that the losers may have a
share with the winners, and part of what was their own again


Sixthly, Be it known, observed and practiced, that no Captains or Colonels,
shall advance beyond their Company, Troop, Regiment or Brigade, but keep in the
middle of the first rank, and the Lieutenant, or Lieutenant Colonel to come
behind in the last rank


The reason of this is, that Colonels and Captains going a space before their
Troops, Companies or Regiments, for to encourage and lead on their Soldiers,
do ill to set themselves as marks for the Enemy to shoot at, and if the Chief
Commanders should be killed, the Common Soldiers would have but faint hearts
to fight, but for the most part they will run away, as being afraid and
ashamed to see the Enemy, when their Chief Commander is killed, and if they
have no Officer or Commander behind them, the Common Soldiers will be apt to
run away, having no worthy witnesses or Judges, to view and condemn their base
Cowardly actions, which otherwise they are ashamed of, choosing rather to fight
their Enemies than to make known their fears


Seventhly, Be it known, observed and practiced, that none of the Army ly in
Garrison Towns, but be always entrenched abroad


The reason of this is, that Towns breed or beget a tenderness of Bodies, and
laziness of limbs, luxurious Appetites, and soften the natural dispositions,
which renderness, luxury, effeminacy, and laziness, corrupts and spoils martial
discipline, whereas the open Fields, and casting up trenches makes Soldiers
more hardy, laborious and careful, as being more watchful

Eighthly, Be it known, observed and practiced, that none unless visibly sick to
be idle, but employed in some Masculine action, as when not employed against an
Enemy; and that they are not employed about the works, forts or trenches, but
have spare time to employ themselves, in throwing the Bar, Tripping, Wrestling,
Running, Vaulting, Riding, and the like exercise


Ninthly, Be it known, observed and practiced, that every Commander when free
from the Enemies surprizals, shall train their men thrice a week at least, nay
every day if they can spare so much time, as putting their Soldiers into
several ranks, files and figures, in several Bodies apart, changing into
several places, and the like


The reason of this is, that the Soldiers may be expert and ready, and not be
ignorant when they encounter their Enemies, for many a Battle is lost more
through the ignorance of the Soldiers, not being well and carefully trained by
their Commanders, or having such Commanders that know not how to train or draw
them up, there are more Battles I say lost thus, than for want of men or
courage


Tenthly, Be it known, observed and practiced, that every Morning when
Encamped, that every Commander shall make and offer in the midst of his
Soldiers a Prayer to Mars, another to Pallas, a third to Fortune, and a fourth
to Fame; these Prayers to be presented to these Gods and Goddesses with great
Ceremony, both from the Commander and Common Soldiers


The reason of this is, that Ceremony strikes a reverence and respect into
every breast, raising up a devotion in every heart, and devotion makes
obedience, and obedience keeps order, and order is the strength and life to an
Army, State, or Commonwealth; and as for the Prayers presented to these
particular Gods and Goddess, is, that Mars would give us courage and strength,
Pallas give us prudent conduct, Fortune give us Victory, and Fame give us Glory
and Renown


Eleventhly, Be it known, observed and practiced, that the most experienced,
practiced, and ingenioust Commanders shall preach twice a week of Martial
Discipline, also those errors that have been committed in former Wars, and
what advantages have been taken, to be cited in their Sermons, as also what was
gained or lost by mere Fortune


Twelfthly, Be it known, observed and practiced, that when the Army marches,
that the Soldiers shall sing in their march the heroical actions done in
former times by heroical women


The reason of this is, that the remembrance of the actions of gallant persons
inflames the Spirit to the like, and begets a courage to a like action, and the
reason of singing of heroical actions only of women, is that we are women our
selves


Thirteenthly, Be it known, observed and submitted to, that no Council shall be
called, but that all affairs be ordered and judged by the Generalless her self


The reason of this is, that all great Councils, as of many persons, confounds
judgments, for most being of several opinions, and holding strongly and stiffly,
nay obstinately thereunto, as every one thinking themselves wisest, cause a
division, and wheresoever a division is there can be no final conclusion


Fourteenthly, Be it known, observed and practiced, that none of this
Effeminate Army admits of the Company of men, whilst they are in Arms or
Warlike actions, not so much as to exchange words, without the Generalless her
leave or privilege thereto


The reason of this is, that men are apt to corrupt the noble minds of women,
and to alter their gallant, worthy, and wise resolutions, with their flattering
words, and pleasing and subtle insinuations, and if they have any Authority
over them, as Husbands, Fathers, Brothers, or the like, they are apt to fright
them with threats into a slavish obedience; yet there shall be chosen some of
the most inferior of this Female Army, to go into the Masculine Army, to learn
their designs, and give us intelligence of their removals, that we may order
our incampings and removings according as we shall think best; but these women
shall neither be of the Body of our Army, nor keep amongst the Army, nor come
within the Trenches, but ly without the works in Huts, which shall be set up
for that purpose


Lastly, Whosoever shall break any of these Laws or Orders, shall be put to
Death, and those that do not keep them strictly, shall be severely punished


But I am to advise you Noble Heroicks, that though I would not have a general
Council called to trouble our designs in War with tedious disputes, and
unnecessary objections, and over cautious doubts, yet in case of life and
death, there shall be a Jury chosen to sit and judge their Causes, and the
whole Army shall give their votes, and the most voices shall either condemn, or
reprieve, or save them, lest I should hereafter be only called in question, and
not the rest, as being not accessory thereunto; and now you have heard these
Laws or Orders, you may assent or dissent therefrom as you please, if you
assent, declare it by setting your hands thereto, if you dissent, declare it by
word of mouth, and the Tables shall be broken


We assent, and will set our hands thereto.


Nell, how does your good Lady?


Faith she seems neither sick nor well, for though her Body seems in health,
her Mind seems to be full of trouble, for she will rise in the midst of the
Night, and walk about her Chamber only with her Mantle about her


Why does she so?


I asked her why she broke her sleep so as to walk about, and she answered me,
that it was frightfull Dreams that broke her sleep, and would not let her rest
in quiet


Alas she is Melancholic in the absence of my Lord.


Now we are resolved to put our selves into a Warlike body, our greatest
difficulty will be to get Arms; but if you will take my advise we may be
furnished with those necessaries, as thus, the Garrison we are to enter is full
of Arms and Ammunition, and few men to guard them, for not only most of the
Soldiers are drawn out to strengthen the Generals Army, and to fight in the
battle, but as many of the Townsmen as are fit to bear Arms; wherefore it must
of necessity be very slenderly guarded, and when we are in the Town, we will
all agree in one Night, when they shall think themselves most secure, to rise
and surprise those few men that are left, and not only disarm them and possess
our selves of the Town and all the Arms and Ammunition, but we will put those
men out of the Town or in safe places, until such time as we can carry away
whatsoever is useful or needful for us, and then to go forth and entrench,
until such time as we have made our selves ready to march, and being once
Master or Mistress of the Field we shall easily Master the Pesants, who are for
the most part naked and defenseless, having not Arms to guard them, by which
means we may plunder all their Horses, and victual our selves out of their
Granaties; besides, I make no question but our Army will increase numerously by
those women that will adhere to our party, either out of private and home
discontents, or for honor and fame, or for the love of change, and as it were
a new course of life; wherefore let us march to the Town and also to our
design, but first I must have you all swear secrecy


We are all ready to swear to what you will have us.


I saw his Face pale as a Lilly white,
His wounds fresh bleeding blood like rubies bright;
His Eyes were looking steadfastly on me,
Smiling as joying in my Company;
He moved his lips as willing was to speak,
But had no voice, and all his Spirits weak;
He shak'd his hand as if he bid farewell,
That brought the message which his tongue would tell;
He Is dead, he is dead, a sunder break my heart,
Let Us meet in Death, though Wars our lives did part.

What news? what news?


Sad news, for there has been a Battle fought betwixt the two Armies, and our
Army is beaten, and many of our gallant men slain


I am sorry for that.


Sir I suppose you are come newly from the Army, pray report the Battle?


Truly I came not now from the Army, but from the Town the Generals heroical
Lady and the rest of the heroicks did surprise, seize and plunder


What the Garrison Town they were sent to for safety?


Yes.


And does their number increase?


O very much, for after the suprisal of the Town the women in that Town did so
approve of their gallant actions, as every one desired to be inlisted in the
roll, and number of the Amazonian Army, but in the mean time of the forming of
their Army, intelligence was brought of the Battle which was fought, and that
there was such loss of both sides as each Army retired back, being both so weak
as neither was able to keep the Field, but that the loss was greater on the
reformed Army, by reason there was so many of their gallant men slain, but this
news made many a sad heart and weeping eyes in the Female Army; for some have
lost their Husbands, some their Fathers, others their Brothers, Lovers and
Friends


Certainly this will fright them out of the Field of War, and cause them to lay
by their Heroic designs


I know not what they will do, for they are very secret to their designs, which
is strange, being all women


Our Generalless seems to be troubled, perceiving how heavily this Female Army
takes their losses


She has reason, for it may hinder or at least obstruct her high designs.


Noble Heroicks, I perceive a mourning veil over the Face of this Female Army,
and it becomes it well; for it is both natural and human to grieve for the Death
of our friends; but consider constant Heroicks, tears nor lamentations cannot
call them out of the grave, no petitions can persuade Death to restore them,
nor threats to let them go, and since you cannot have them alive being Dead,
study and be industrious to revenge their quarrels on their Enemies lives, let
your justice give them Death for Death, offer upon the Tombs of your Friends
the lives of their Foes, and instead of weeping Eyes, let us make them weep
through their Veins; wherefore take courage, cast off your black Veil of
Sorrow, and take up the Firematch of Rage, that you may shoot Revenge into the
hearts of their Enemies, to which I hope Fortune will favor us; for I hear
that as soon as the Masculine Army have recovered strength there will be
another Battle fought, which may be a means to prove our loves to our Friends,
our hate to our Enemies, and an aspiring to our honor and renown; wherefore
let us employ our care to fit our selves for our march


We shall follow and obey you, where, and when, and how you please.


Does my Lady hear of my Lords Death?


The Messenger or Intelligencer of my Lords Death is now with her.


How died my Lord?


Madam, he fought with so much courage, as his actions will never dye, and his
valor will keep alive the memory of this War: for though he died, his Death
was Crowned with Victory, he dug his Grave out of his Enemies sides, and
built his Pyramid with heaps of their Bodies, the groans of those he slew did
ring his dying Knell


What became of his body?


He gave order before the Armies joined to fight, that if he were killed, his
body should be sought out, and delivered to you: for he said it was yours
whilst he lived, and he desired it might be disposed of by you when he was
dead; his desires and commands were obeyed, and his body is coming in a Litter
lapt in Searcloth


Worthy Sir, I give you many thanks for your noble relation, assuring my self
it is true because you report it, and it is my Husband that is the subject and
ground of that honorable relation, whom I always did believe would out-act all
words


He has so Madam.


Sir, if I can at any time honorably serve you, I shall be ready whenever
you will command me


Your Servant Madam.

If your Ladyship has not heard of Monsieur la Hardy's Death, give me leave to
tell you he is slain


I am sorry, and for his Lady, for she loved him most passionably.


Help, help, my Lady is dead, my Lady is fallen into a swound at the report of
my Masters being killed


Alas poor Lady, her Spirits are drowned in Sorrow, and Grief has stopped her
breath; loosen her Garments, for she is swelled with troubled Thoughts, her
Passions lie on heaps, and so oppress life, it cannot stir, but makes her
senceless


O my Husband, my Husband!


Bow her forward, bow her forward.


O let me dye, let me dye, and bury, bury me with him.


Alas poor Lady, put her to Bed, for her life will find most case there.


O life what art thou? and Death where do thou lead us, or what dissolv'st
thou us into


I wonder there is no news or Messenger come from the Army yet, when there
usually comes one every day


O Sir, what news?


Faith there has been nothing acted since the last Battle, but it is said
there will be another Battle very suddenly, for the Enemy provokes our men to
fight, by reason our Lord General lies sick of his wounds, having had a
Feavour, caused by the anguish of his hurts, and by his Sickness the Enemies
hope to gain an advantage of his absence, but he has put a Deputy in his place
to command in chief until he recovers


What is become of the Female Army?


I hear they are marched toward the Masculine Army, but upon what design I
cannot understand


Call my Steward.


O Madam, that I should live to hear this cursed news of my dear Lord and
Masters Death


Life is a curse, and there is none happy but those that dye in the womb before
their birth, because they have the least share of misery; and since you cannot
weep out life, bear it with patience; but thy tears have almost washed out the
memory of what I was to say, but this it is, that I would have you sell all my
Jewels, Plate, and Household Furniture to the best advantage, and to turn off
all my Servants, but just those to attend my person, but to reward all of them
with something more than their wages, and those Servants that are old, and have
spent their youth with my Lords Predecessors and in his service, but especially
those he favored most, give them so much during their lives as may keep them
from the miseries of necessity, and vexations of poverty. Thirdly, I would have
you hire the best and curioust Carvers or Cutters of Stones to make a Tomb
after my direction; as First I will have a marble piece raised from the ground
about half a man's height or something more, and something longer than my Husbands
dead body, and then my Husbands Image Carved out of Marble to be laid
thereupon, his Image to be Carved with his Armor on, and half a Headpiece on
the Head, that the face might be seen, which face I would have to the life as
much as Art can make it; also let there be two Statues, one for Mercury, and
another for Pallas, these two Statues to stand at his head, and the hands of
these Statues to join and to be laid under as carrying the head of my Husbands
figure, or as the head lay thereupon, and their hands as his Pillow; on the
right side of his figure, let there be a Statue for Mars, and the hand of
Mars's Statue holding the right hand of my Husbands figure, and on the left
hand a Statue for Hymen, the hand on the place of the heart of my Husbands
figure, and at the feet of the figure let there be placed a Statue for Fortune
also, about a yard distance from the Tomb; at the four Corners thereof, let
there be four Marble Pillars raised of an indifferent height, and an Arched
Marble Cover thereupon, and let all the ground be paved underneath with Marble,
and in the midst on the outside of the marble roof let the Statute of Fame be
placed in a flying posture, and as blowing a Trumpet; then some two yards
distance square from those Pillars, let the ground be paved also with Marble,
and at the four Corners four other Marble Pillars raised as high as the former,
with Capitals at top, and the body of those Pillars round, and the Statues of
the four Cardinal Virtues placed on those Capitals, sitting as in a weeping
posture, and at the feet of those Pillars the Statues of the Graces embracing
each Pillar; as the Statue of Charity, the Pillar whereon the Statue of Justice
sits, and the Statue of Patience, the Pillar of Temperance, and the Statute of
Hope, the Pillar of Prudence, and the Statue of Faith, the Pillar of Fortitude;
then set a grove of Trees all about the outside of them, as Laurel, Myrtle,
Cipress, and Olive, for in Death is Peace, in which Trees the Birds may sit and
sing his Elegy; this Tomb placed in the midst of a piece of ground of some ten
or twenty Acres, which I would have encompassed about with a Wall of Brick of a
reasonable height, on the inside of the Wall at one end, I would have built a
little house divided into three Rooms, as a Gallery, a Bedchamber, and a
Closet, on the outside of the Wall a House for some necessary Servants to live
in, to dress my meat, and to be ready at my call, which will be but seldom,
and that by the ring of a Bell, but the three Rooms I would have furnished
after this manner, my Chamber and the Bed therein to be hung with white, to
signify the Purity of Chastity, wherein is no Colors made by false lights; the
Gallery with several Colors intermixed, to signify the varieties, changes, and
incombrances of life; my Closet to be hung with black, to signify the darkness
of Death, wherein all things are forgotten and buried in Oblivion; thus will I
live a signification, not as a real substance but as a shadow made betwixt
life and death; from this House which shall be my living Tomb, to the Tomb of
my dead Husband, I would have a Cloister built, through which I may walk freely
to my Husbands Tomb, from the injuries of the weather, and this Cloister I
would have all the sides thereof hung with my Husbands Pictures drawn to the
life by the best Painters, and all the several accidents, studies and exercise
of his life; thus will I have the story of his life drawn to the life: see this
my desire speedily, carefully, and punctually done, and I shall reward your
service as a careful and diligent Steward and Servant


It shall be done, but why will not your Ladyship have my Lords figure cast in
Brass


Because the Wars ruin Tombs before Time does, and metals being useful therein
are often taken away by necessity, and we seldom find any ancient Monuments
but what are made of Stone, for covetousness is apt to rob Monuments of metal,
committing Sacrileges on the dead, for metals are soonest melted into profit,
but Stone is dull and heavy, creeping slowly, bringing but a cold advantage,
wherein lies more pains than gains


But your Ladyship may do all this without selling your Jewels, Plate, and
Household Furniture


It is true, but I would not let so much wealthly dead in Vanity, when
exchanging them for money, I can employ it to some good use


Your Ladyship has forgotten to give order for blacks.


No I have not, but I will give no mourning until my Husbands body be carried
to the Tomb; wherefore I have nothing more to employ you in at this time, but
only to send hither my Chaplain Doctor Educature


Doctor, although it is not the profession of a Divine to be an Historian, yet
you knowing my Husbands life and natural disposition best, being in his
Childhood under you Tutorage, and one of his Family ever since, I know none so
proper for that work as you; and though you are naturally an eloquent Orator,
yet the bare truth of his worthy Virtues and Heroical actions will be
sufficient to make the story both profitable, delightful, and famous; also I
must entreat you to choose out a Poet, one that does not merely write for gain,
or to express his own wit, so much as to endeavor to Pencil with the pen
Virtue to the life, which in my Lord was so beautiful as it was beyond all
draughts, but the theme will inspire his Muse, and when both these works are
writ, printed and set out, as divulged to the World as a pattern for examples,
which few will be able to imitate, then I would have these books ly by me as
Registers of memory, for next unto the Gods my life shall be spent in
Contemplation of him; I know I shall not need to persuade you to do this, for
your affection to his memory is ready of it self; but love and duty binds me to
express my desires for his Fame leaving nothing which is for my part thereunto


Madam, all the service I can do toward the memory of my dear Pupil; and noble
Lord and Patron, shall be most devoutly observed and followed; for Heaven
knows, if I had as many lives to dispose of as I have lived years, I would have
Sacrificed them all for to have redeemed his life from Death


When I have interred my Husbands body, and all my desires thereunto be
finished, I shall be at some rest, and like an Executrix to my self executing
my own will, distributing the Rites and Ceremonies, as Legacies to the dead,
thus the living gives the dead; but O my Spirits are tired with the heavy
burden of Melancholy, and grow faint for want of rest, yet my senses invite me
thereunto, yet I cannot rest in my Bed, for frightfull Dreams disturb me;
wherefore I will ly down on this floor, and try if I can get a quiet sleep on
the ground, for from Earth I came, and to Earth I would willingly return


Weep cold Earth, through your pores weep,
Or in your bowels my salt tears fast keep;
Inurn my sighs which from my grief is sent,
With my hard groans build up a Monument;
My Tongue like as a pen shall write his name,
My words as letters to divulge his fame;
My life like to an Arch over his Ashes bend,
And my desires to his grave descend;
I warn thee Life keep me not Company,
I am a friend to Death thy Enemy;
For thou art cruel, and every thing torments,
Wounding with pain all that the World presents;
But Death is generous and sets us free,
Breaks off our Chains, and gives us liberty;
Heals up our wounds of trouble with sweet rest,
Draws our corrupted passions from our breast;
Lays us to sleep on Pillows of soft case,
Rocks us with silence nothing hears nor sees.
O that I may here sleep my last.
If it were not for Dreams sleep would be a happiness next unto Death; but ^
find I cannot sleep a long sleep in Death, I shall not dye so soon as I would

Love is so strong and pure it cannot die,
Lives not in sense, but in the Soul does lie;
Why do I mourn? his love with mins does dwell,
His love is pleased mine entertains it well;
But mine would be like his one imbodied,
Only an Essence or like a Godhead.

How does our Lady Doll?


To day she began to sit up, but yet she is very weak and faint.


Heaven help her.


You that are Heavens Almner, should distribute Heavens gifts out of the purse
of your mouth, and give her single Godly words instead of single silver pence,
to buy her some Heavenly food to feed her famisht mind


Thou are a full-fed wench.


If I were no better fed than you feed me, which is but once a week, as on
Sundays, I should be starved


You must fast and pray, fast and pray.


All the young Gallants in the Town are preparing themselves with fine Cloths
and Feathers to go a woing to the two rich Widows, the Lady Iantil, and the
Lady Passionate


Riches are the Loadstone of affection, or at least professions.


The truth is, Riches draw more Suitors, than Youth, Beauty, or Virtue.


For Heavens sake let us go and address our selves to the two Rich Widows.


For my part I will address my self to none but the young Widow, the Lady
Iantil, and to her let us go without delay


It will be uncivil to go so soon after their Husbands Death, for their
Husbands are not yet laid in their Graves


If they were we should come too late, for I knew a man which was a great
friend of mine, who was resolved to settle himself in a married course of life,
and so he went a wooing to a Widow, for a Widow he was resolved to marry, and
he went a wooing to one whose Husband was but just cold in his grave, but she
told him she was promised before, so he wooed another whilst she followed her
Husbands Corpse, but she told him he came too late, whereat he thought with the
third not to be a second in his Suit, and so expressed his desires in her
Husbands sickness, she told him she was very sorry that she had past her word
before to another, for if she had not, she would have ma le him her choice,
whereat he cursed his imprudence, and wooed the fourth on her wedding day, who
gave him a promise after her Husband was dead to marry him, and withal she
told him, that if she had been married before, it had been ten to one but he
had spoke too late, for said she, when we are Maids we are kept from the free
conversation of men, by our Parents or Guardians, but on our wedding day we are
made free and set at liberty, and like as young Heirs on the day of one and
twenty we make promises like bonds for two or three lives: wherefore I fear we
shall miss of our hopes, for these two Widows will be promised before we
address our Suit


No no, for I am confident all do not so, for some love to have the freedoms of
their wills, for every promise is a bondage to those that make a Conscience to
keep their promise, besides, it is not only variety that pleases women, but
new Changes, for stale Acquaintance is as unpleasant as want of change, and the
only hopes I have to the end of my Suit, is, that I am a Stranger and unknown,
for women fancy men beyond what they are when unknown, and prize them less than
their merits deserve, when they are acquainted


Well, we will not stay, but we will do our endeavor to get admittance.


Madam, how do you find your health?


Very bad, for I am very ill, but I wonder at your Fortitude, that you can bear
such a Cross as the loss of your Husband so patiently


O Madam I am like those that are in a Dropsy, their face seems full and fat,
but their liver is consumed, and though my sorrow appears not outwardly, yet my
heart is dead within me


But your young years is a Cordial to restore it, and a new love will make it
as healthful as ever it was


Pray Madam eat something, or otherwise you will kill your self with fasting,
for you have not eaten any thing since the beginning of your sorrow


O carry that Cawdle away, carry it away, for the very sight does overcome my
Stomach


Pray Madam eat but a little.


I care not for it, I cannot eat it, nor will not eat it: wherefore carry it
away, or I will go away


Prithee if thy Lady will not eat this Cawdle, give it me, for I have an
Appetite to it; but I wonder you will offer your Lady any thing to eat, but
rather you should give her something to drink, for I have heard sorrow is dry,
but never heard it was hungry


You are mistaken, for sorrow is sharp, and bites upon the Stomach, which
causes an eager Appetite


I am sure weeping eyes make a dry Throat.


But Melancholy Thoughts make a hungry Stomach: but faith if thou were a Widow,
by thy eating thou would have another Husband quickly


Do you think I would marry again.


Heaven forbid that a young woman should live a Widow.


Why, is it a sin for a young woman to live a Widow?


I know not what it would be to you, but it would be a case of Conscience to me
if I were a Widow


By thy nice Conscience thou seem to be a Puritan.


Well, I can bring many proofs: but were it not a sin, it is a disgrace.


Where lies the disgrace?


In the opinion of the World, for old Maids and musty Widows are like the
plague shunned of by all men, which affrights young women so much, as by running
from it they catch hold on whatsoever man they meet, without consideration of
what or whom they are, by which many times they fall into poverty and great
misery


You teach a Doctrine, that to escape one mischief they fall on another, which
is worse than the first; wherefore it were better to live a musty VVidow as you
call them, than a miserable Wife; besides, a man cannot intimately love a
VVidow, because he will be a Cuckold, as being made one by her dead Husband,
and so live in Adultry, and so she live in sin her self by Cuckolding both her
Husbands, having had two


I believe if you were a VVidow you would be tempted to that sin.


Faith but I should not, for should I commit that sin, I should deserve the
Hell of discontent


Faith you would marry if you were young, and fair, and rich.


Those you mention would keep me from marrying: for if any would marry me for
the love of youth and beauty, they would never love me long, because time ruins
both soon; and if any one should marry me merely for my riches, they would love
my riches so well and so much as there would be no love left for me that
brought it, and if my Husband be taken Prisoner by my wealth, I shall be made a
Slave


No, not if you be virtuous.


Faith there is not one in an Age that takes a wife merely for virtue, nor
valews a wife any thing the more for being so; for poor Virtue fits mourning
unregarded and despised, not any one will so much as cast an eye toward her,
but all shun her as you say they do old Maids or musty Widows


Although you plead excellently well for not marrying, yet I make no question
but you would willingly marry if there should come a young Gallant


What Is that, a Fool that spends all his wit and money on his Clothes? or is it
a gallant young man, which is a man enriched with worth and merit


I mean a Gallant both for bravery and merit.


Nay, they seldom go both together.


Well, I wish to Heaven that Hymen would give thee a Husband, and then that
Pluto would quietly take him away to see whether you would marry again, O I
long for that time


Do not long too earnestly, lest you should miscarry of your desires.


Who was it that run away?


Nell Careless Madam Iantils Maid.


O that I could contract a bargain for such an indifferent mind as her young
Lady has, or that the pleasures of the World could bury my grief


There is no way for that Madam, but to please your self still with the present
times, gathering those fruits of life that are ripe, and next to your reach,
not to endanger a fall by climing too high, nor to stay for that which is
green, nor to let it hang whilst it is rotten with time, nor to murmur for that
which is blown down by chance, nor to curse the weather of accidents for
blasting the blossoms, nor the Birds and Worms of Death, which is sickness and
pain, for picking and eating the berries, for nature allows them a part as well
as you, for there is nothing in the World we can absolutely possess to our
selves; for Time, Chance, Fortune and Death, has a share in all things, life
has the least


I think so, for I am weary of mine.


Mistress Dorothy, there are two or three Gentlemen that desire to speak with
one of the Widows Maids, and you belong to one


Well, what is their business?


I know not, but I suppose they will only declare that to your self.


Gentlemen, would you speak with me?


Yes, for we desire you will help us to the honor of kissing your Ladies
hands, thereon to offer our service


Sir, you must excuse me, for the Sign of VVidowhood is not as yet hung out,
Mourning is not on, nor the Scurcheons are not hung over the Gate, but if you
please to come two or three days hence I may do you some service, but now it
will be to no purpose to tell my Lady, for I am sure she will receive no visits



