My Lord, what makes you frown on me, surely I never willingly offended you?


But the report I hear of you offends me.


I hope my behavior is not liable to any aspertion or evil censure; for, as
you have used me civily, so I have behaved my self modestly


I perceive you are a subtle insinuating young Lady.


Think me not subtle, for being so brod as not to slight your Love; not so
uncivil, as to scorn your noble favors; but strive to merit your worthy
affections; but if I have erred in my endeavors, pray pardon me, and if you
please to tell me my error, I shall rectify it


I hear you will speak more lies, than tell truths.


Truly I am too strict a Votary to truth to tell a lie.


I should be glad you were vowed one of her Order.


I am so, and have taken the habit of sincerity upon me.


Tell me truly, do you never use to lie?


If you have opinion that I never, or seldom, speak truth, let me say what I
will, you will still believe it is a lie; but truly, I did never tell a lie as
I do know of, but did always speak truth


I hear to my great grief you have many faults, pray mend them.


I am sorry there are so many ill reports, or rather aspersions laid on me as to
grieve you; but surely, youth cannot commit many faults; but Age, that has had
time to commit faults in; but if you can believe my faults surmounts not all
accounts: I shall desire to know them


Examine yourself, and you will find them.


I shall call a particular Council, and make a General search, and what
thoughts, words, or actions, I can find guilty, or prove Criminal, I shall
condemn, and sacrifice them on the Altar of Repentance, and crave mercy and
forgiveness


Pray do so.


The Queen of Attention is come to be one of your Audience.


I am come to hear, and see your Daughter, whom same reports to be the wonder
of this Age


It had been more proper, and fit, for my Daughter to have waited at your
Court-Gates, until your Majesty had commanded her into your presence, than for
your Majesty to come hither, to hear, and see her; but she being a plain bred
girl, durst not be so bold


If your Daughters wit be answerable to her beauty, she is a wonder indeed.


Madam, this gracious honor, and honorable grace, is beyond the management of
my young years; the evil of my weak confidence, and the compass of my little
wit, and my obscure breeding, has made me so Ignorant, that I know not in what
manner I should behave, or address myself toward your Majesty; but if I commit
faults in misbehaviour, pray impute it to my ignorant youth, and not to
disobedience


I see nothing yet in your behavior, but that you may be not only a pattern
for young, but also for grave Age, to take example from


Madam, the generosity of your Majesty's Nature, the Magnificence of your
Majesty's mind, and the Charity of your Majesty's disposition, gives an
overflowing commendation, like to the goodness of the Gods, that gives more to
the Creature, than the Creature can deserve


Let me tell you young Lady, your speeches are as pleasing to the ear, as your
beauty is delightful to the eye


Your Majesty is like a Deity, can turn or translate words, like poor Mortals,
into a glorified sense, like as into a glorified body


Sir Thomas Father Love, if your Daughter speak at all times, and always so
eloquently, I should not wonder you let her speak in public


I beseech your Majesty, that you will rather judge me an over fond Father,
which is natural, than a vain opiniatour, in that I give her liberty to speak
in public


If it were a vanity, it might be well forgiven; but pray let me hear her speak.


Great Queen! I, nor no other, should offer, or dare to speak before, or to
such Supreme persons as your Majesty, without a sore premeditation; for the
words and behaviors of speakers should be fitted to the degrees and qualities,
Powers, Offices, and Authorities of the Auditory; But your Majesty's commands
makes that an obedient duty, that would otherwise be a presumption; wherefore,
on the ground of duty I speak at this time before your Majesty; but the Royalty
of your person, the brightness of your beauty, the fame of your virtues, and
the glorious splendor of your Majestical Grandeur has so amazed me, that my
understanding is as it were blind, which will cause my tongue to stagger, and
my words to run stumbling out of my mouth; but I hope your Justice will pardon
them; For, as Divine Justice belongs to the Gods, moral Justice to Nature; so
humane Justice to Monarchial Princes, which justice is weighed and measured out
according to merit, or desert, be they good or bad: For which Justice Gods and
Princes are both feared and loved; and Justice is the chief Pillar or upholder
of Monarchical States and Commonwealths; for without Justice there can be no
Government, and without Government there can be no Rule, and without Rule there
can be no peace, and where peace is not, there will be wars and, wars causes
ruin and destruction; But for the most part, those Kingdoms that have arrived
to the height of Glory, declines or falls to ruin: The reason is, that a low
condition is necessitated, and weak; wherefore they seek for help to strengthen
themselves, which makes or rather forces every particular person to associate,
and unite either by Laws of Covenants, to which they submit and obey: But when
a Kingdom is in a Glorious condition, and is full of prosperity, every
particular Citizen or man thinks he can stand upon his own foundation, flinging
off their supporters, which is Duty, and obedience, which makes them fall to
ruin; For when men comes to that height of pride, caused by prosperity, that
they all strive to be Superiors, and Commanders; they become Factious and
mutinous against the Magistrates, Rulers, or Governors; which Factions begets
wars, either by calling in Forriegners, or by making, or siding into parties
amongst themselves; for it is to be observed, that States, or Monarchies do
oftener fall by the pride and Factions of the Commons, or Subjects, than by the
Tyranny of the Rulers or Governors; But it is the nature of the vulgar sort of
mankind, to be the most basest, fearfulest and dejected Creatures in
adversity, that Nature has made, and in prosperity to be the proudest,
insultingest and imperious and cruelest of all Creatures. But Kings and Royal
Princes should do as Gods, which is to keep their Subjects in aw, with the
Superstitious fear of Ceremonies; wherefore Princes should do no actions, no,
not the meanest, without Ceremony to astonish the vulgar; for Ceremonies begets
fear, fear begets Superstition, Superstition Reverence, Reverence Obedience,
Obedience brings Peace, Peace brings Tranquillity; But where Ceremony is not
used, the Gods are neglected, and Princes despised; for Ceremony is the Throne
which Gods and Princes sits on, which being pulled away, they fall from their
Glory; for Ceremony is the Royal Crown which makes them Majestical, it is the
Scepter by which they rule, it is the Altar at which all the Subjects kneel, do
bow, and they offer up there their natural free liberty

But most glorious Princess, you and your Subjects are like the Sun, and the
rest of the Planets, moving perpetually, keeping their proper Sphere, they
moving in civiler loyalty about you, to receive the light of your Authority,
and you move in them as the just center, spreading your glorious beams round
about the Circumference of your Dominions, and in the light of your commands
they see their duty: And your Laws are like the fixed Stars, which twinkling
move in the night of great offenses, and does assist the innocent with
sparkling light. And your Majesty governs like the Gods, your wisdom by your
Works is known, and by your Wisdom is your Power Immense


Young Lady let me tell you, that you are fit to be a Governesse, (although you
be very Young) that can speak so well of Government


It Is happier for me to be a Subject to so gracious a Sovereign, than if I were
govern a people my self


Madam, you retire your self more to solitary than you were used to do.


Because I find the world not only more foolish, but more wicked than I thought
it was, but who would endure the world, or the worlds folly, since
solitariness is sweet and melancholy


The truth is, that words pleases the world more than reason; and vice is
exercised more than virtue


You say right, for words takes the world of mankind by the ears, drawing them
about even where they please; when reason is not heard, also vice will be
embraced, and virtue kicked away; thus words and vice will get a room, both in
the head and heart, when reason and virtue are barred out, but if perchance
they are crowded in, they are straight thrown out as unfit guests, or
troublesome intruders


But Madam, let me advise you from so much solitude, for obscurity shadows
virtue, and buries beauty


And Solitude does hide defects, as well as Excellencies.


But you have no defects to hide.


Nor Excellencies to divulge.


It Is strange you can be so crafty in dissembling, and yet so young; for you
appear to me to be innocently modest, and of a bashful Nature, and yet it is
told me you are so impudently bold, speaking so wantonly, as it is a shame to
Nature, which makes me fear you will prove dishonest


Perchance I might learn modest words, but not the signification; yet surely I
never spoke such words I understood not, nor have I many speaking faults to
accuse me


I am told you speak so knowingly of marriage, as if you were a mother of many
children


The mystery of marriage I neither know, nor guess at, neither do I know how
children are bred or born


If you be so ignorant, you may loose your Virginity for want of knowledge and
wit to keep it


I have been taught, none can be devirginated that suffers not immodest action,
if so, I am a pure Virgin, and my thoughts are so innocent, and my life so
honest, as I wish the Chambers of my mind or soul, (which is the brain and the
heart) were set open to your view; there should you see the pictures in the
one, and read the letters in the other, for truth records all in the heart, and
memory pencils all that the imaginations or Senses brings into the brain


I cannot but believe what is so confidently reported; but your words are such
charms, as they inchant my angry passions, and makes my will a prisoner


Let reason, as a Knight of Chevalry, and truth as his Esquire, set him free,
and open the gates of understanding, then you might see virtue clothed with
white Innocence, and truth free from the bonds of falsehood


So you were as wife as witty.


Wisdom is built upon the Foundation of Experience; wherefore none can be wise
but those that are old; but though I am too young to be wise, yet not to be
vertously honest


Pray Heaven you prove so.


This Lady Sanspareile has a strange spreading wit, for she can plead causes
at the Bar, decide causes in the Court of Judicature, make Orations on public
Theaters; act parts, and speak speeches on the Stage, argue in the Schools,
preach in the Pulpits, either in Theology, Philosophy, moral and natural, and
also physic and Metaphysick


The truth is, she is ushered by the Muses, led by the Sciences, and attended
by the Arts


I do perceive my shiftlesse youth is round beset with enemies.

Suspicions round about me placed,
With slandring words my same disgraced:
My innocence, as crast is thought,
My harmless life to ruin brought;
Who will adore the Gods, if they
Vice, virtue, in one balance lay?

This Noble assembly may chance to think it a vanity in me, never to receive
any particular visit or adresse from any particular or single person, but I do
so, by reason life is lost in particular acquaintance, as small Rivers are in
running through the earth. But in the public, life swims as in a full Sea,
having a fair gale of observation, and Sails of opportune time to swim
withal, marking the Card of actions, and the Needle of dispositions drawn or
turned by the Loadstone of affection, to the North Pole of Experience, to guide
me safe from the Rocks of slander, and quicksands of scandal, till I come to
the Port of death, there to unload my Life's Merchandise; and I hope my Voyage
may be so prosperous, as I may be enriched with the praises of After-Ages

Likewise, the reason why I choose to speak in public, is, that I would not
speak idely, for in public I shall take care of what I speak, and to whom I
speak, when in private visitations to single persons, my speech may be
careless with negligence, in which I may throw away my time with my words;
For, to speak to no purpose, is to make words useless, and words is the marks
to distinguish things, and Figures to number merits with, and Notes to record
the noble Acts of men

But at this time I am to speak by my Fathers command, upon a Subject which my
contemplation has no acquaintance with, which is marriage, and I hear by my
Father, that you have all treated with him, or rather entreated him to bestow
me in marriage, which is to make me unhappy, not but that I believe what I
hear, which is, that you are all persons of Quality, Birth, Breeding, and
Merit, far beyond my desert, yet with the best, if any best there be, being all
worthy; yet were I a wife to any one, I might be unhappy, by reason marriage is
an incumbered life, although the Husband and the Wife were fitly matched for
years, Births, Fortunes, Dispositions, Humors, Capacities, Wits,
Conversations, Constancies, Virtues, and affections; and first, by your leave,
I will discourse of men's marriage, by reason Man being accounted the Supremer
Creature, and always bearing Rule, he shall be first placed. As for marriage,
to men it is a great hinderance to a speculative life, it cuts off Phancies
Wings, and quenches out the Poetical Fire, it breaks the Engine of invention,
disturbs sweet contemplation, corrupts honest Counsels, obstructs all Heroic
actions, obscures fame, and often times causes infamy by the wifes
inconstancies, and many times by her indiscretion; for a man is dishonored if
his wife is but thought wanton, or but inclining to be amorous, and though she
be as sober in her Nature, and as constant as any woman can be, yet the very
suspicion is a disgrace, and if the suspicion is a disgrace, what is a visible
truth? His very Neighbors makes Horns as he passes by their doors, whilst he
sadly and shamefully hangs down his head with a dejected countenance, which
makes him seem a Coward and a Fool, although it be unjust that the faults of
the wife should be a blemish to the Husbands honor; yet so it is, this being
the greatest cause why Husbands are jealouse, which jealousy is more for their
Honors sake, than for their Wives affections; thus you see how dangerous a
thing it is for man to marry, who must trust his honor to the management of a
Foolish Woman, and women naturally like children, inconstant, unless education
does rectify their frail natures, peevish humors, various appetites, and
inconstant affection: Likewise marriage is not only apt to corrupt the mind
with jealousy, but with Covetousness; for the extreme fondness and natural
love of Parents to their Children, maks them strive by all their endeavors to
enrich them; this makes them gripe their Tennants, pinch and half starve their
servants, quarrel and dispute with their neighbors, corrupt Judges take
Bribes, besides it makes men apt to rebel, and turn Traitorus, murmuring at
their Taxes and impositions, it also makes them timorous and fearful in wars,
by reason their wife and children may be ruined by their death. Also it makes
them dull in their Conversations, by reason they are always plodding for their
worldly affairs; and for the Muses, had a husband time to entertain them, yet
the wife would right them, or drive them from him, with their quarreling
disputes, or senseless prizes; besides most women are as jealouse of the
Muses, as of their Maids; but to treat or discourse of married women, is to
discourse of a most unhappy life, for all the time of their lives is ensnared
with troubles, what in breeding and bearing children, what in taking and
turning away Servants, directing and ordering their Family, counting their
expenses, and disbursing their revenues, besides the vexations with their
servants, for their quarreling and combining, for their sloth and sluttery, for
their spoils and carlessnesse, for their treachery and couzenage, and if they
have Children, what troubles and griefs do unsue? Troubled with their
frowardness and untowardnesse, the care for their well being, the fear for
their ill doing, their grief for their sickness, and their unsufferable sorrow
for their death; Yet this is the best part, and not to be avoided: But if these
troubles be joined with an ill Husband, it heightens their torments; for if he
be a Drunkard, she had better be married to a Beast, her nostrils is stencht
with the Lees of wine, her eyes are offended with his rude behavior, and her
ears are struck with a cursed noise of cursing and Oaths; and if he be a
Gamester, she lives in an unsettled condition, she knows not how soon she may
want; for if she have plenty one day, she may be in a condition to beg the
next. And if her Husband be inconstant, and loves variety of women: O how
jealousy torments her, besides the wrongs she suffers from him! what affronts
she receives from his Mistress! How is she despised amongst her neighbors?
slighted by her servant, suspected by the world for having some defect? as
either to be incontinent, sluttish, foolish, froward, cross, unkind, ill
natured, sickly, or diseased, when perchance the woman may be worthy to be
marched with a temperate, wise, valiant, honest, rich and honorable man; and if
women go fine, and take pleasure in themselves, and Garments, their Husbands
are jealouse; and if they regard not themselves or Garments, their Husbands
dislikes rhem; For though men will swear to their wives they like them better
in their old clothes, than other women in their glorious Apparel; because they
would not have them expensive, yet if their wives neglect themselves, regarding
not their dressing, but sleights all outward Adornmentss, and change of
Garments as prodigal spend-thrifts, they starve their Husbands esteem in their
thrifty plainness, Consumes their affections in their peiced Petticoates, and
buries their Husbands love in their dirty rags; And from the Dunghill of dirty
rags, and grave of soul Linen, is their Husbands transformed to beastly
Adulteries, stealing by degrees out of one Form into another, as from a doting
Husband, to a fond Husband, form a fond to a discreet Husband, from a discreet,
to a careful Husband, from a careful, to a careless, from a careless, to a
disliking, from a disliking, to a hating, and then they begin to wander; As
first, an eye glances, from an eye glance, to an admirer; from an admirer, to a
professor, from a professor, to a dissembler; from a dissembler, to an
Adulterer; then for the dresses and garments of his Mistress, First, from
clean, to new; from new, to fine; from fine, to brave; from brave, to glorious;
from glorious to fantastical; from fantastical to profusely various from
profusely, various to any dirty Slut. But his wife (on the other side, if his
wife desires) appears handsome, and practices civil behavior, and endeavors
to be sine, takes care to be cleanly, observes to be fashionable, her Husband
straight becomes jealouse, although she does this for his sake, and to keep his
affection, yet he thinks it is for the affection and sake of some other man,
which causes private discontents, from private discontents to quarreling
disputes; from quarreling disputes, to public exclamations, from public
exclamations, to open defiance; from open defiance, to devorcement; and though
I cannot say this by, or from experience, having it only from relation, yet I
do as faithfully believe it, as if I were experienced therein: On which faith,
I made a vow never to marry, since I hear men are so hard to please, and apt to
change; wherefore if I were married, instead of discoursing of several
arguments, I should be groaning and sighing, and weeping, with several pains
and vexations; and instead of a silent solitary contemplation, a clamorous
quarrelsome conversation; instead of a peaceable life, I should be always in
civil wars; and instead of being happy, I should be miserable; for marriage is
like a ship, which always lies on the roughest Bilows of the Sea, rouling from
side to side with discontents, sailing uncertainly, with inconstancy, and
various winds, But noble, civil, kind and affectionate Gentlemen, as I have
told you, I have made a vow never to marry, and surely marriage is not so happy
an estate, or so pleasing a condition of life, as to persuade me to break my
vow, neither can flattering Rhetoric, nor enticing beauty, nor adoring,
admiring, deploring, praying, weeping Suitors persuade me, no, not a bleeding
Suter, were I sure he would dye, did he not enjoy me; for I will never be so
dishonorable, perjurious, and impious, to break the holy Laws, and pull the
Virgin Altars down, built in the conscience, on which are vows offered to Gods
on high: Should I blow out that with faint inconstancy, that pure bright Vestal
Fire of innocence, from whence the Essence of chaste thoughts ascends to Heaven
high; But rather than I would break my vow, I wish my ears as deaf as death,
that hears no flattering sounds, nor sad complaints, nor terrifying threats, my
eyes as dark as night, least light should bring some false deluding object in,
for to deceive me; my heart like Adamant, so hard love cannot enter, nor pity
nor compassion wound; but howsoever, I connot be wife to you all; wherefore
since I cannot be every man's wife, I will dye every man's Maid. But I must tell
this Noble Assembly, their meeting has occasioned a quarrel here; for
bashfulnesse, and confidence has fought a Duel in my Cheeks, and left the
stains of blood there


WHilst I was in his favor, my mind was like a pleasant Garden, where several
Phancies like several Birds, did make sweet melody; and in this Garden a large,
high Tree of Noble ambition grew; whereon hung fruits of hopes, but low
misfortunes now has cut it down, and therewithal have built a house, where
melancholy dwells, darkened with Clouds of discontents, and winds of sighs, and
showers of tears, does blow and power thereon.

Faith you will be well wived, for your assianced is known to be a Liar, and
feared she will be a Whore, and proved a Thief


How, a Thief?


Why, she has stolen my Pearl Chain worth a thousand Pounds.


It Is impossible.


It is not impossible to prove a Thief.


No, for there is too many to miss; but sure it is impossible she should prove
one, she is so honorably born, and I never heard but she was Virtuously bred


By your favor, Covetousness or Necessity, may tempt Honorable Births, and
corrupt minds, that with plenty would be honest enough


I grant, misery may prove some Noble souls sprung from Honorable stocks, yet
not to be so wickedly base as to steal, although so unworthy as to shark


Why, sharking is next Neighbor to stealing, or as near Kindred as an
Equivocation is to a Lie


But she was never so necessitated, as to make her either a shark, or a Thief,
having always plenty


But she is covetous, and youth that is fond of all things they see, desires to
enjoy all things they have not, and will endeavor by any means or ways to
compass their desires


I never found my Youth prompt to any such Acts.


Without more discourse, she has stole my Chain, and I can prove it.


It Is strange, I know not what to think, or how to judge, which of the two
Ladies is a Devil; for surely one of them is.

The Lady Sanspareile is the miracle of this age, the world does not parrallel
her with the like; for her behavior is graceful and becoming, her Countenance
modest and wife, her speech Majestical and witty, yet grave and learned, and
her Oratory is after a New way


It is reported, that there are many men come from all parts of the world to
hear her, aad those that cannot understand this Language, comes only to see
her, so famous is she to all the world


She is a great Honor to our Nation.


I hear she does intend to plead in the behalf of poor Suitors, and has asked
leave of the Queen to be a pleader at the Bar, for all such as suffered wrong
as injustices, and for such Clients as has just causes, but has not means to
follow the Law, as to see the Lawyers, and she will plead for them gratis


It is a pious and Noble Act.


Also her Father has challenged all the eloquent Orators of our Nation, to
make Orations extemporately; likewise he has challenged the most famous
Scholars and learned men to dispute with her


Her Father is most doatingly fond of her.


He has reason, and out of love to her he is building a very fine Library, to
lay in all her Works; for they say she writes much, and has writ many
excellent Works


She deserves a Statue for her self, as well as a Library for her Works.


Madam, my Lord and the Lady Incontinent has sent me to tell you, you must
come to be examined about the Chain


I am so shrunk up with fear, that methinks I could thrus^ my self into a
Nut-shell to hide myself


Faith if you could, it would not conceal you; for they would crack the
Nut-shell and find you out


The Lady Incontinent has brought a Justice, who has power to make you
confess


You may perceive her guilty, she trembles and shakes and looks so pale.


Pray judge me not guilty by my countenance, bring it not as a witness against
me, for the childish fears in my heart, causes a trembling, which like an
Earthquake, shakes my body, and makes my breath as pent up Air, that pants for
passage, striving to get forth, and my innocent bashfulnesse, or my bashful
innocence, makes my eyes like perturbed lights, that see nothing clearly; my
words to flow like rough and broken streams; for my mind is so troubled, and my
passions in such a storm, as my words can neither flow easy, nor free


Here be two that will witness that she stole the Chhain.


I will swear she took the Chain of Pearl, and put it in her pocket, and so
went out of the room with it


Why did not you follow her, and take it from her.


I thought she would bring it again, for I never suspected she would deny it.


And will you witness the same Informer?


I will witness I saw it in her hand, looking on it.


What say you for your self Lady Innocence?


I say my accusements does not make me guilty of a crime; but I confess I took
the Chain in my hand, out of a curiosity, and trial of my judgment or skill, to
see whether I could find any defect, in so much valued, esteemed, and
high-prized a thing as Pearl; but not any ways out of a coveton; Appetite, as
to steal it, nor had I any tempting thoughts thereto, nor wished I that or the
like should be lawfully given me


What did you with it, when you had done viewing it?


I laid it on the Table from whence I took it off.


But here are those that will swear you carried it away with you.


Yes that we will.


I cannot always avoid a false accusation.


Will you swear you did not?


Yes, If my Oath will be taken.


Well, you did take it that is certain, wherefore you were best confess it, or
you shall be wrackt to make you confess it


I will never bear false-witness against my self; I will dye first.


My Lord, pray let her be carried away, and be whipped, until the be forced to
confess it


Let me killed first: for to be whipped is base, and is only fit for
Gally-slaves, or those that are born from Slaves; but to be killed is Noble,
and gives an Honorable triumph


Young Lady, you are here accused by two Witnesses, and unless you can bring
Evidence to clear you, you are liable to punishment


Truly Sir, I have but two invisible Witnesses, Conscience and Innocence, to
plead for me, and Truth my Judge, who cannot be bribed, although it may be
over-powr'd, by false and slanderous reports


But it is imagined by your best friends, you are guilty.


Neither my friends, nor enemies, can create me a Criminal, with their
Imaginations


But speak, are you guilty?


To what purpose should I speak? for what can I say to those that make it their
delight to accuse, condemn, and execute? or what justice can I expect to have,
where there is no equity? wherefore, to plead were a folly, when all hopes are
cut off; to desire life, a double misery, if I must endure Torments; but
silence, and patience, shall be my two Companions, the one to help me in my
suffering, the other to cut of impertinencies


What think you Justice, is she guilty?


Why should you make a question, when it has been proved by Witnesses? Come
Justice, Come, and drink a Cup of Sack, and give your opinion then


I am so confidently accused of this Theft, as I am half persuaded I did take
the Chain, but that Honor and Honesty says I did not


Where is your Mistress? the people do flock about the house to see her, as I
think they will pull it upon my head if she shows not her self to them,
wherefore call her


Come, Come Child, there are such expectations without for thee; but what makes
thee to look so heavy


Truly Sir, I am not well.


Not well? Heaven bless thee; where art thou Sick?


I cannot say I am very sick, or in any great pain; but I find a general
alteration in me, as it were a fainting of spirits


Prithee say not so, thou do so affright me; but thou art not very sick, art
thou


I hope I shall be better Sir.


My dear Child go to bed, whilst I send for some Doctors to thee.


TO whom shall I power out my sad complaint? for all do them a Melancholy mind.
O Gods! how willingly would I be buried in the grave with dust, and feast the
worms, rather than live amongst mankind! Oh! Oh! that these Melancholy damps
arising from my afflicted Soul could extinguish the Lamp of life, or that my
sad and grieved thoughts that feed upon my troubled Spirits, could bite with
sorrows teeth, the thread of life asunder


My sweet Mistress, why do you weep?


The spring of grief does send forth streams of tears to wash off my disgrace,
and the foul spots which slandring tongues have stained, or rather slain'd my
reputation; for which my eyes, did they not weep, would seem unnaturally
unkind; but my dead reputation is imbalm'd with salt tears, bitter groans,
shrouded in sorrows, and entombed in misery


My dear Lady, you are imbalm'd with the precious gums of Virtue, and sweet
spices of wit wrapped up in youth and beauty, and are intombed, or rather
inthroned in honest hearts; wherefore waste not your self with grief; for
certainly the world will condemn your Accusers, and not you


Those feeble hopes cannot my spirits uphold, they give no light of comfort to
my mind; for black despair, like Melancholy night, mustles my thoughts, and
makes my Soul as blind. O but why do I thus mourn in sad complaints, and do not
curse Fortune, Fates, and destiny, their Wheels, there spindel, threads, and
Chains


May Nature great, turn all again to naught,
That nothing may with joy receive a thought.
She is deeply Melancholy, Heavens ease her mind.


The Lady Sanspareile cannot live, for the has no pulse.


No, she is descending to the grave.


But had we best tell her Father so?


No, by no means as yet.


Why not? he will know when she is dead.


Mr. Doctors, What, do you mean to let my Daughter dye? will you not prescribe
something to give her


Madam, we shall do our best, you may be confident.


What if you prescribed a Glister, or a Purge?


I shall not need Madam.


Why, if any one be sick, they ought to have some remedies applied to them:


We shall consider what course is best to be taken.


For Gods sake do not neglect her.


Mr. Doctors, what is your opinion of my Daughter?


Truly Sir, she is very dangerous sick.


I can find no pulse she has.


Nor we Sir, that makes us doubt her.


Pray consult about her what is best to be done.


We shall Sir.


What makes you look so ghastly pale?


I am so ashamed of my accusation, as my bashfullness is beyond all blushing,
as greatest griefs are beyond all tears, it causes my limbs to tremble, face
look pale, like Death's assault, making my courage fail


Perchance you are ashamed to confess so base a crime; you may confess to me,
for I shall strive to hide your faults, and cover them with some excuse;
wherefore confess; for though it be a fault to steal, yet it is a double fault
to hide it with a Lie, and by these crimes you do offend the Gods; nor will
their anger be removed, unless you confess and ask pardon


Your Doctrine is very good, and Application well applied, had I been Guilty;
but being Innocent, they are vainly uttered


I hope you will agree to resign the interest you have to me, if I should
desire you


Saints never offered up their Souls to God more willingly, than I all interest
to you; not but that I love you, yet I should be loath to be bound to one that
has so ill an opinion of me, as you have


The World would condemn me, if I should marry you, to stain my Posterity with
your Crimes


O Heavens, is my scandal of so deep a dye, as to stain Predecessors and
Posterity! yours may avoid it, but my Predecessors are spotted all over


I cannot choose but love her, although I fear she is guilty; but I perceive she
is resolved not to confess, as being ashamed of it


Let spotless Virgins bear me to my grave, and holy Anthems sing before my
Hearse, and soft-toucht Instruments to play the while, and keep just time with
tears, that trickling fall from the sad eyes of my most sorrowful friends; and
one my Coffin spread upon a covering of smooth Satin, white, to signify here
how I lived a Virgin, pure I lived and dyed; and let my works which I have
wrought, and spun out of my brain, be given to times Library, to keep alive my
name

And set a Lilly-Garland on my Hearse,
On every leaf therein, stick on a verse;
And when my Coffin to the grave you bring,
Let Poets on my Hearse some verses fling.
For whilst I lived I worshipped Nature great,
And Poets are by Nature savoured.
I in the Muses Arms desire to Dye,
For I was bred up in their Company:
And my requesl's to them, when I am dead,
I may amongst them be remembered.
But death draws near, my destiny is come; Father farewell: may time take up
my years, which death cuts off, and add them to your life: Peace keep your
mind, and Comfort give you rest


But why do you weep dear Father? my life's not worth your tears; yet Heavens
do weep, and mingle with dull earth their Cristal streams, and earth's
refresht thereby; so is not death, for death is ever dry


O Child! O Child! my heart will break.


Sir, why do you sigh and groan, and grieve, that I must dye? life is
perpetual, and death is but a change of shape

Only I wish that Death may order it so,
That from your roots I may your flower grow.
I fear not Death, nor am I loath to dye:
Yet I am loath to leave your Company.
But O the Muses stay my dying lips to close. Farewell


What art thou sted? dear Soul wheredost thou go? stay and I will bear thee
Company

Where art thou Soul? why make thou such great haste? I pray thee stay, and
take thy aged Fathers Soul along with thee, left it should wander in the dark
and gloomy shades to find thee out. O! O death! quick dispatch, Let me
unprisoned be, my body is old, decayed and worn, times ruins shows it. Oh! Oh!
let life fall, for pity pull it down.

O no, she is gone, she is gone, I saw her dead; her head hung down, like as a
Lilly, whose stalk was broke by some rude blusterous wind

There, there I see her on her dutious knee; Her humble eyes cast to the
ground; Her spotless hands held up for blessings crave, asking forgiveness
for faults not done. O no, She is dead! She is dead! I saw her eyelids cloze
like watery Clouds, which join to shut out the bright Sun; and felt her hands
which Death made cold and numb, like as to Cristal balls; She is gone, she is
gone, and restless grows my mind; thoughts strive with thoughts, and struggle
in my brain, passions with passions in my heart make War

My Spirits run like suries all about;
Help help for Heavens sake, and let life out.

O my daughter! my daughter is dead, she is dead. Oh that ever I was born to
bear a Child to dye before me. Oh she was the Comfort of my Heart, the
pleasure of my Eyes, the delight of my life. Oh she was Good, she was Sweet,
she was Fair. O what shall I do, what shall I do


Mercury lend me thy winged feet, that I may fly to Heaven, there to observe,
how all the Gods and Godesses do gaze upon my Beautiful Child; for she is
fairer than the light that great Apollo gives; and her discourse more ravishing
than the Music of the Spheres; but as soon as she sees me, she will leave them
all, and run unto me, as she used to do, kneeling will kiss my hands, which she
must not do, being a Goddess, and I a Mortal, wherefore, I must kneel to her,
and carry her an offering; but what shall the offering be? Let me think. Why I
will kneel and offer up my Aged life unto her Memory; but now I think of it
better, I cannot dye in Heaven; wherefore, let me Study, let me Study, what she
did love best when she lived upon the Earth; O I now remember, when I did ask
her what she loved best, she would Answer, her Father and her Fame; but I
believe, if she were here it would be a hard Question for her to resolve, which
she preferred; and being not to be separated in Affection, we will not part in
our Resurrection; wherefore Mercury farewell: for I will fly up with the Wings
of her good Fame

And carry up her Wit, and there will strew
It on Heavens floor, as bright as Stars will show;
Her Innocence shall make new Milky ways,
Her Virtue shall Create new Worlds to praise
Her never-dying Name.
Ha, Ho! It shall be so, it shall be so.

I am not so much in love with the World, as to desire to live, nor have I
offended Heaven so much, as to be afraid to dye; then way should I prolong my
life, when Honor bids me dye? for what Noble Soul had not rather part with the
Body, than live in Infamy? Then it is not Death that affrights me, and yet I find
my Soul is loath to leave its bodily Mansion; but O to be buried in Oblivions
grave is all I fear; no Monumental Fame, nor famous Monument, my Soul
displeases, that makes it loath to leave the body in forgotten dust, whilst it
does sadly wander in the Air


Soul be at ease, for the Memory of the dead is but like a dying Beauty, vades
by degrees, or like a Flower whither'd, has neither Sent, Color, nor Taste,
but moulders into dust: so has the mind no form of what is past

But like as formless heaps those Objects lie,
And are entombed in the dark Memory.
O Foolish Vanity, to be so much a slave to Fame, since those that Fame does
love the best, and favors most, are not Eternal. Wherefor

Nature persuades me to release my woe,
Though foolish Superstition Natures foe
Forbids it, yet Reason aloud says dye;
Since Ease, Peace, Rest, does in the grave still lie.

I am resolved, then Come sweet Death, thou friend that never fails, give me my
liberty. But stay my hasty resolution; for I would not willingly go to the
grave as beasts do, without Ceremony; for I being friendless, those humane
Funeral rites will be neglected, none will take the pains, nor be at the charge
to see them performed; but some base vulgar person will throw me into the Earth
without respect or regard; wherefore I will Living perform the Ceremonies, and
as a guess or friend be at my own Funeral; it shall be so, and I will prepare
it


Multitudes of Melancholy thoughts crowd in my brain,
And run to pull down Reason from his Throne;
Fury as Captain leads the way,
Patience and Hope is trod upon:
O these distracted thoughts burrie my Soul about,
Seeking a place to get a passage out.
But all the Ports are stopped. O Cursed Death, for to prolong a life that is
so weary of its Mansion


Sir, will you give order for your Daughters Funeral, and direct how you will
have her interred


How say you? why I will have you rip my body open, and make it as a Coffin to
lay her in, then heave us gently on sighs fetched deep, and lay us on a Hearse of
sorrowful groans, then cover us with a Dark, Black, Pitchy, Spungy Cloud, made
of thick Vapor, drawn from bleeding hearts; from whence may tears of showers
run pouring down, making a Sea to drown remembrance in

But O remembrance, is a fury grown,
Torments my Soul, now she is gone.

Sir, where there is no remedy, you must have patience.


Patience, out upon her, she is an Idle lazy Gossip, and keep; none Company but
Cowards and Fools, and slothful conscientious Persons; neither is she useful
but for indifferent employments: for what is of extraordinary worth, Patience
does but disgrace it, not set it forth; for that which is transcendent and
Supreme, Patience cannot reach. Wherefore give me Fury, for what it cannot
raise to Heaven, it throws it straight to Hell; were you never there


No, nor I hope shall never come there.


Why Sir, I was there all the last Night, and there I was tortured for chiding
my Daughter two or three times whilst she lived; once because she went in the
Sun without her Mask; another time because her Gloves were in her Pocket, when
they should have been on her Hands; and another time, because she slep'd when
she should have studied, and then I remember she wept. O! O! those precious
tears! Devil that I was to grieve her sweet Nature, harmless Thoughts, and
Innocent Soul. O how I hate my self, for being so unnaturally kind. O kill me,
and rid be of my painful life


He is much distracted, Heaven cure him.


The Miracle is deceased, the Lady Sanspareile I hear i^ dead.


Yes, and it is reported her Statue shall be set up in every College, and in the
most public places in the City, at the public charge; and the Queen will
build a Sumptuous and Glorious Tomb on her sleeping Ashes


She deserves more than can be given her.


I hear her death has made her Father mad.


Though her death has not made every one mad like her Father, yet it has made
every one melancholy; for I never saw so general a sadness in my life


There is nothing moves the mind to sadness, more than when Death devouts
Youth, Beauty, Wit, and Virtue all at once


There is a Hearse placed upon the Stage, covered with black, a Garland of
Ciprus at the head of the Hearse, and a Garland of Myrtle at one side, and a
Basket of Flowers on the other

O Nature, thou have created bodies and minds subject to pains and torments,
yet thou have made death to release them! for though Death has power over
Life, yet Life can command Death when it will; for Death dares not stay, when
Life would pass away; Death is the Ferryman, and Life the Wastage

But here great Nature, I do pray to thee,
Though I call Death, let him not cruel be:
Great Jove I pray, when in cold earth I lie,
Let it be known how innocent I die.
Here in the midst my sadder Hearse I see;

Yet I am white, as innocent as day,
As pure as spotless Lillies born in May;
My loose and flowing hair with Ribbons tied,
To make Death Amorous of me, now his Bride;
Watchet for truth, hair-colour for despair,
And white as innocent as purest Air;
Scarlet for cruelty to stop my breath,
Darkning of Nature, black, a type of death.
Roses and Lillies 'bout my Coffin strew,
Primroses, Pinks, Violets fresh and new:
And though in deaths cold arms anon I lie
I Will weep a shower of tears these may not dye,
A Ciprus Garland here is for my head,
To crown me Queen of Innocence, when dead;
A Myrtle Garland on the left side placed,
To show I was a Lover; pure and chaste;
Now all my saddest Rites being thus about me,
And I have not one wish that is without me.
Here on this Hearse I mount the Throne of death,
Peace crown my soul, my body rest on earth:
Yet before I dye,
Like to a Swan I will sing my Elegy.
Life is a trouble at the best,

Joys still with sorrows they are Crowned,
No quietness till in the ground.
Man vexes man, still we do find,
He is the torture of his kind:
False man I scorn thee in my grave
Death come, I call thee as my slave.

Here ends my Lords Writing.

I will observe how she passes away her time, when she is alone.


Great Jove grant that the light of Truth may not be put out, with the
extinguisher of Malice


How she feeds her melancholy!

What are you acting a melancholy Playby your self alone?


My part is almost done.


By Heaven she has stabbed her self.


Call not for help, life is gone so far it is past recovery; wherefore stay and
hear my last words; I die, as judging it unworthy to outlive my honest Name,
and honorable Reputation. As for my accusers, I can easily forgive them,
because they are below my Hate or Anger, neither are worthy my revenge; But
you, for whom I had not only a devout, but an Idolatrous Affection, which
offered with a zealous Piety and pure Flame the sincerity of my heart; But you,
instead of rewarding my Love, was cruel to my life and Honor, for which my
soul did mourn under a Veil of sadness, and my thoughts covered with
discontent sat weeping by: But those mourning Thoughts I have cast off,
clothing my self with Deaths pale Garments; As for my pure Reputation, and
white Simplicity, that is spotted with black Infamy by Hellish slander, I have
laid them at Heavens Gates, just Gods to scour them clean, that all the World
may know how innocent I have been: But Oh! farewell, my fleeting Spirits pure
Angels bear away


O speak at the last! Are you guilty or not?


I am no more guilty of those crimes laid to my charge, than Heaven is of sin.

O Gods receive me. Oh! Oh!


Great Patience assist me; Heart hold life in,
Till I can find who is guilty of this sin.

How are you now?


O Friend! I shall now be well, Heaven has pity on me, and will release me
soon; and if my Daughter be not buried, I would have her kept as long out of
the Grave as she can be kept, that I might bear her company


She cannot be kept longer, because she was not unbowelled.


Who speaks her Funeral Oration?


Why Sir, your distemper has so disordered all your Family, as it was not
thought of


She shall not go to the Grave without due Praises, if I have life to speak
them: Wherefore raise me up, and carry me to the Holy place before her Hearse,
thus in my Chair, sick as I am; For I will speak her Funeral Oration, although
with my last words, Thus will I be carried living to my Grave


When I do think of her, my mind is like a tempestuous Sea, which foams and
roars, and roles in Billows high; My brain like to a Ship is wracked, and in
it is ravenous Waves my heart is drowned; And as several winds do blow, so
several thoughts do move; some like the North with cold and chilly Fears,
others as from the South of hot Revenge do blow

As from the East despairing storms do rise,
A Western grief blows tears into mine eyes.

My Lord, why are you so melancholy for that which is past, and cannot be
helped


Oh! the remembrance of her death, her cruel death, is like the Infernal
Furies, torments my soul, gives it no case nor rest; For sometimes my soul is
flung into a Fire of Rage

That burns with furious pain,
And then with frozen despair it rips it up again.
But I unjust and credulous, I was the cause of her untimely death.


O my Lord, forgive me, for I have murdered the innocent Lady you grieve for;
for my false Accusation was the hand that guided the dagger to her heart; but
my Ladies command was the Thief that stole the Chain, for she commanded me to
take the Chain, and accuse the Lady of the Theft, for which she gave me the
Chain for a reward; This I will witness by oath unto you and all the World;
For it is heavier than a world upon my Conscience


Why did your Lady so wicked an act?


Through Jealousy, which bred Envy, Envy Malice, Malice Slander, and this
Slander has produce Murder


Oh my Lady! My Lady has hanged her self; for when she heard Falsehood was gone
to tell your Lordship the truth of the Chain, she went into a base place and
hung her self; and upon her breast I found this written Paper


It is the Lady Incontinents Handwriting.

I have been false to my Marriage Bed, lived impudently in the sin of Adultery,
in the public face of the World; I have betrayed the trust imposed to my
charge, standered the Innocent, poisoned the Instrument I employed, Falsehood.
All which being summed up, was worthy of hanging


She has saved me a labor, and kept my Heroic Honor free from the stains of
having laid violent hands on the Effeminate Sex


What shall be done with this dead Body?


Let her Ladies body, with hers, be thrown into the Fields, to be devoured of
Beasts



Wash each step as white as Snow,
With pure Crystal streams, that rise
From the Fountain of your eyes.
Fresher Lillies like the day
Strew, and Roses as white as they;
As an Emblem to disclose
This Flower sweet; short lived as those.
The whilst her Father is carried as sick in a Chair, the Chair covered with
black, and born black by Mourners, he himself also in close Mourning; when they
have gone about the Stage

Then the Father is placed in his Chair, upon a raised place for that purpose,
the raised place also covered with Black; he being placed, speaks her Funeral
Sermon

Most Charitable and Noble Friends, that accompany the Dead Corpse to the Grave,
I must tell you, I am come here, although I am as a Dead Man to the World, yet
my desire is to make a living Speech, before I go out of the world, not only to
divulge the Affections I had for my Daughter, but to divulge her Virtue, Worth,
and good Graces; And as it is the custom for the nearest Kindred, or best and
constantest Friends, or longest acquaintance, to speak their Funeral Oration,
wherein I take my self to be all, wherefore most fit to speak her Funeral
Oration; For I being her Father, am her longest acquaintance, and constantest
Friend, and nearest in Relation, wherefore the, fitest to declare unto the
world my natural and Fatherly Love, Death will be a sufficient witness; For
though I am old, yet I was healthful when she lived, but now I cannot live many
hours, neither would I, for Heaven knows, my affections struggle with Death, to
hold Life so long as to pay the last Rites due to her dead Corpse, struck by
Death's cruel Dart: But most Noble and Charitable Friends, I come not here with
eye filled with sal^ tears; for sorows thirsty Jaws has drunk them up, sucked
out my blood, and left my Veins quite dry, and luxuriously has eat my Marow
out; my sighs are spent in blowing out Life's Fire, only some little heat there
does remain, which my affections strive to keep alive to pay the last Rites due
to my dead Child, which is, to set her praises forth, for living Virtuously;
But had I Nestors years, 'twould prove too few, to tell the living Stories of
her Youth, for Nature in her had packed up many Piles of Experience, of Aged
times, besides, Nature had made her Youth sweet, fresh and temperate, as the
Spring; and in her brain, Flowers of Fancies grew, Wits Garden set by Natures
hand, wherein the Muses took delight, and entertained themselves therein,
Singing like Nightingales, late at Night; or like the Larks ere the day begin;
Her thoughts were as the Celestial Orbs, still moving circular without back
ends, surrounding the Center of her Noble mind, which as the Sun gave light to
all about it; her Virtues twinkled like the fixed Stars, whose motion stirs
them not from their fixed place; and all her Passions were as other stars,
which seemed as only made to beautify her Form; But Death has turned a Chaos
of her Form, which life with Art and Care had made, and Gods had given to me: O
cursed death, to rob and make me poor! Her life to me was like a delightful
Mask, presenting several interchanging Scenes, describing Nature in her several
Dresses, and every Dress put in a several wa^^ Also her life was like a
Monarchy, where Reason as sole King, did govern al her actions; which actions,
like as Loyal Subjects did obey those Laws which Reason decreed; Also her life
was like Jove's Mansions high, as being placed above this worldly Globe; from
whence her Soul looked down on duller earth, mixed not, but viewed poor mortals
here below; thus was her life above the world, because her life prized not the
Trifles here; Perchance this Noble Company will think I have said too much, and
vainly, thus to speak

That Fathers should not praise their Children so,
Because that from their Root and Stock did grow;
Why may not Roots boast if their Fruits be good?
As hindering worth in their own Flesh and blood,
Shall they dissemble, to say they are naught,
Because they are their own? sure that is a fault
Unpardonable, as being a lie that is told,
Detracting lies, the baser lies I hold.
Neither can strangers tell their life and worth,
Nor such affections have to set them forth,
As Parents have, or those that's near of Kin,
Virtuous Partiality, sure that is no sin,
And virtue, though she be lovliest when undrest
Yet she is pleased, when well she is expressed.
But Oh! my words have spent my stock of breath,
And Life's commanded forth by powerful Death;
When I am dead, this company I pray,
The last rites done, me by my daughter lay;
And as her soul did with the Muses fly,
To imitate her in her a verse, I dye.

Noble Friends, you heard his request, which was; to be buried in his daughters
grave; and whilst you show your charity, in laying the Corpse of his daughter in
the grave, I will carry out his body, and put it into a Coffin, and then lay
him in the same grave

The whilst the Virgins take up the Lady Sanspareiles Hearse, and whilst they
are putting it into the grave, this Song following was sung


Put her gently in the earth,
What of Moral, or Divine,
Here is lapt up in this shrine;
Rhetoric dumb Philosophy,
Both those arts with her did dye.
And grieved Poets cannot choose,
But lament for her their Muse.
When she was putting into the Grave, this Song following was sung.

Her Tomb, her Monument, her Name,
Beyond an Epitaph her Fame;
Death be not proud, embracing more
Now, than in all thy reign before;
Boasting thy Triumphs, since thou must
But justly glory in her dust,
Let thy Dart rust, and lay it by,
For after her none's sit to dye.

Now I am free, no hinderance to my own Tragedy.

This Tomb her sacred Body does contain.

Dear Soul, pardon my crimes to thee; they were crimes of ignorance, n^^ malice.

Sweet gentle Spirit^, fly me not, but stay,
And let my Spirits walk thy Spirits way;
You loved me once, your Love in death renew,
And may our souls be as two Lovers true;
Our Blood's the Bonds, our wounds the Seals to Print
Our new Contract, and Death a witness in it.
Had I as many lives as Poors in skin,
He sacrifize them for my ignorant sin.

I did fear this, which made me follow him, but I am come too late to save his
life. O my Lord speak if you can


Friend, lay me in this Tomb, by my affianced Wife; for though I did not usher
her to the grave, I will wait after her


Noble Spectators, now you have seen this Play,
And heard it speak, let us hear what now you say;
But various judgments, various sentences give,
Yet we do hope you will sentence it may live.
But not in Prison be condemned to lie,
Nor whipped with censure, rather let it dye
Here on this Stage, and see the Funeral Rites,
Which is, to put out all the Candle lights.
And in the grave of darkness let it rest,
In peace and quiet, and not molest
The harmless soul, which hopes Mercury may
Unto the Elysium fields it safe convey.
But if you sentence life, the Muses will
Attend it up unto Parnassus Hill.
If so, pray let your hands, here in this place,
Clap it, as an applause, the triumph grace.

