HE is indeed a pretty Gentleman.


How well his dancing did become him!


He had a very handsome and unaffected way.


His Discourse too (me thinks) I did extremely fancy, it was not too much
starched with Formality, nor yet rudely loose


He was though in my mind somewhat too full of his Complements.


Yet they were still so fitted to, and grounded on what was said, that he
cannot but have a sudden and quick wit


He carried indeed the whole Entertainment through with an exceeding grace.


Some would have spent five times as much, yet forced our good natures in the
end to have laughed at it. Prithee what is he


Why do you not know, child of ignorance?


You know I came to the Town but yesterday.


O it is true: And I pray you how do a ^ our friends in Surrey? My Cozen
Norris? and Mrs. Nonesuch


They all desire to be remembered; but --


How did my Cozen like the Stuff I bought her for her Gown?


Very well. But prithee --


I did the best I could to please her fancy.


But what was that we were a talking of? O, of the Gentleman; what is he?


Why he i^ one that lives here about the Town* of a fair Estate, his name is
Welbred, he has now for some while been a servant of your Cozens


Me thought he applied himself much to her. Do^t think she ere will love him?


Love him? How can she otherwise choose? Th^re is not a La^^ twix^ Lud-gate-hill
and Westminster but is ready to run mad for him; at the first ^ight he smites
and ki^s, where e're he comes, there is none that can withstand him


But yet me thinks -- But ^rethee let us talk no more of him.


Stay, here is your Cozen: Prithee what Girl is that wi^h her?


It is a friends Daughter of mine in the Country, that goes to School here in
London; she came up with me


Affection! Where have thou been? I have been looking for thee all over the
house


I your Affection, and you keep things so close from me!


What things* I pray?


You need not make so strange, for I know all: there is a Lad, they say, that
smites and kills where e're he comes, and you are she in whom he intends to
finish all his Conquests


Smite! and kill! Where e're he comes! Why, I hope, it is ^ot the old bald
fellow with the Sith on his neck, old Monsieur Time? Smite, and kill! Strange,
terrible words! What meanest thou


I mean, he makes them talk or dream of him for a week, or so, or perhaps sigh
or whine a little


Hold there, as for talking or dreaming I am for you, but do you think I e're
shall sigh for him? I know whom you mean


Why not?


Not I, as I live.


Spoke she but true!


And yet the man deserves well, as men now are. He is (I must confess) a
handsome sprightful youth, well qualified in most things that become a
Gentleman: and since it is my friends desire that I should marry, he is one (I
think) I should not be ashamed in company to own for a Husband


O my unhappy fortune!


The man I don't dislike, it is possible I might stay for a worse; and as
possible, if I did stay, I might have a better, for I see nothing in him in
which I could place my happiness


No* Bu^ how come we to talk of this Gentleman again?


Believe me, thou love him with a pretty indifferent love.


Her Love was certainly articled and agreed on by the old man her father. But
let us find somewhat else to entertain the time withal. And now I think of it,
what was that Gentlewoman who was there last night in the Sky colored Satin
Gown


O she is one of the great wits of the Town.


I thought so, yet Mr. Welbred put her shrewdly to it.


Her mind runs on nothing but Welbred, I think.


They say that thou too (Affection) go for a kind of Country wit, what e're
thou ailest to be thus sober here


Sitting up so late last night has somewhat disordered me, I confess.


But as thou hopest to be married under thirty, think not of it.


Why, I pray? for that is somewhat a terrible Conjuration.


Why? A female wit is a strange prodigious kind of thing, it frights off all
that have no wit, and they that have will never come on, except it be for an
Afternoon or so, to exercise their tongues. I have been out of conceit with it
ever since I heard a Gentleman say, that he was going to a Lady that I know, a
reputed wit, to prepare him for a Visit to his Mistress. Fie upon it, a thing
fit for nothing, but to make one a common courting stock. I hate the very
thought of it


Well then, if we must not think on them that have wit, let us think on them
that have none: and first, how did you like the Gentleman that was there last
night with the black curled hair


With the black curled hair?


O, I know whom she means, it was a friend of that same Gentlewomans, she was
here with him this morning to invite me to such another business to night. But
why, I pray, do thou take him to have no wit? Does he pay all the Reckonings
where e're he comes? Will he drink deep with a Lad that will keep a brace of
Geldings and a Lacquey out of twenty pound a year? A dammee Captain, or an
Oxford Majo^, and then game with them


No, I dare pass my word for him.


Why, these are the only modern fools.


Well, I cannot tell what you call a fool, (I must confess) I am a little too
young to be his Godmother, but yet me thinks, a dull and stupid thing (as I
conceive him to be) should have a name


I am sure if he had had any thing in him, there was a Lady gave him a fair
opportunity to show it


Mr. Welbred would have paid her home.


I was a great while in doubt whether he could speak or no.


Well, I cannot tell, -- for ought I know, he might serve with a good Jointure
to boot; for my part, I saw him do nothing much absurd. And had you been here
to day, you would have thought his silence last night, to have been more out of
choice then any thing else


Really Cozen, there was a rare Gentleman in the slashed doublet, and a
buttoned Cap, me thought he talked incomparably


Whom does she mean?


Mr. Lagul certainly


Alas poor soul!


Well, I must be going.


Nay, prithee stay a little longer.


No, I have appointed to meet one,


Who ^ Mr. Hadland, I Will warrant you.


It Is no matter for that.


Well, I hope when you come to lie at this end of the Town again, we shall more
enjoy your company.


O Mrs. Pate.


My Cozen too is certainly in love with him, for I have observed her mind all
this day strangely musing, although sometimes it be disguised with some forced
flashes of mirth: what e're is talked of, her thoughts still run on him, and
then she will recall her self, not thinking that affected hiding shows what
else would never be marked. -- It Is strange to see how generally this Gentleman
does take: For my part, as I see not any thing in him that I much mislike, so
truly naught that I admire: He has (I must confess) some graceful and becoming
parts and qualities, a handsome way in talk; yet when I mark it seriously, me
thinks it is as curious Pictures, which (although they make a pleasing show,
yet) for the most part are drawn on course and ordinary matter. I needs must
say, he has this happiness, that if he excel in ought, it is in things of that
familiar nature, that each place and company he comes in, afford him
opportunity to show it. And this certainly is the only thing that makes him
make a greater blaze then some of far more worth, whose eminence lying in that
which is more choice, cannot so frequently discover it self, nor is their value
prostituted unto every eye; but they, as great Bells, who are not easily nor on
all slight occasions raised, yet being up, will far out sound any of these
tinckling ting-tang blades. -- Would heaven alot me but such a one to spend my
time withal, it would be what I most desire; but yet I think I shall scarce run
that odious fortune of a stale Maid in expectation of such a blessing.


Mr. Welbred is come (forsooth) and desires to speak to you.


Carry him into the Dining Room, and tell him I will wait upon him presently.

Stay, He will now set hard upon me, what shall I do? Yield? No, me thinks my
fancy at this time does not prompt me to it; I will once more put him off, if
handsomely I can.


He will not out of my mind, but does over rule my thoughts and force them to
desires vain and impossible: I impossible, for h^ must needs fix on her, she
is a Lady so without exception, of so fair a Fortune and such exquisite parts
improved unto the height. He certainly then is hers; me thinks the very thought
of that should be enough to master these desires; for usually Objects, though
never so pleasing, if not probable, searce stir the mind; for since we all are
rational, it were absurd our wills should act in vain. But on the contrary,
when things with ease may be attained, we never give over until we are arrived
at the utmost of our wishes. Thus nothing is more ordinary then for my Lady to
love her Gentleman, or Mrs. Anne her fathers man. But if a Country Clown
coming up hither, and seeking for his Lawyer in Grayes Inn, should step into
the Walks, and there should chance to spy some Masterpiece of Nature, some
famed Beauty, that for a time has born the name, he would stand amazed,
perhaps wish that his Ione were such, but farther would not be stirred,
impossibility would stop more bold desires, and quench those sparks that else
would turn to fires. But I without the remedy of hope, even in despair, begin
a love that promises naught but grief and endless tears. But here he comes
with my Cozen, I will stand and hear what they say.


Come sweet Lady be no longer cruel, it is fit for vulgar common beauties to
inhance the price of their Enjoyment by a long denial; such Art were vain in
you, and desperate in me, since I already am wound up unto the highest, and
higher cannot go but break


Must I answer to all this presently? that me thinks would be the greatest
inequality in the world; in all reason certainly I should have as much time as
you had to study it


Study it? He that is inspired does not so little deliberate; I speak my very
thoughts, on you my mind does naturally run, nor can it vary, for Nature that
has in you raised Beauty to its highest pitch, outdone her own Idea's, has
thereby made you Commandresse of my soul, and all its passions and affects to
wait on none but you; therefore seeing you have the power, O do no longer
tyrranize


Why, what now would you have me say?


What would I have you say? Can that be a question? Could your breath create me
owner of the world, could I have diversity of woulds? Alas my thoughts are long
since fixed on you, and my desires forgot all other Objects but your self


My self? then that is it you would have.


O God, -- Would have? I, above --


I am lost, undone, undone:


Nay, pray now let me go, for you have me not yet, I must first chide you a
little for this kind of language. What things do you think us women to be? Or
rather, what would you have us our selves to fancy? For could I, me thinks, bu^
look into the breast of some fond silly Gi^le, and see what thoughts she
entertaines, by that time such a blade as you has told her some such stories,
that she gives Beauty being, and other faces to be accounted of as they partake
of hers; that she can smite, wound, kill, ^as if the fate of all mankind did
hang upon her will, and twenty such things more, which if the poor thing have
but wit enough to u^derstand, she is (without mercy) ruined, lost, undone


Why I pray, Lady? for this is somewhat strange.


I Will warrant you I have a reason for what I say; for first, she thinks her
self somewhat (though what she cannot tell) that has a just quarrel to Fate,
that she can have naught but so poor a thing as man her mate; she fancies not
this mean, she fancies not another Discourse, she hates this man's breeding,
she hates another face, and for that colored hair she refuses a thousand
pounds a year. Thus she continues for some years, until at the last, about some
twenty nine, she does begin to understand herself. But now the tide of Suitors
and her beauty being eb'd, she stands a Fare for the next that comes; and in
all haste she makes some desperate match, proves some old man's Nurse; perchance
not so well, but Will her fathers man, her Tailor, or some Reformado Captain
must serve her turn; or else (if she have any spirit) in a melancholy pet, she
vows a Virgin life, and for his sake that first deceived her, turns
man-hater. Come, come, in faith Sir you are to blame, were I now some kind of
Less, forty to one but that I were merely cozened of a good Husband


Did one ever see such a plaguey Wench as this? --


Truly, Sir, in my mind, a very ingenuous confession.


She were as fond that would believe them, as if she should give credit to her
Mercer; meet words of course, a tone the tongue must run in for fashions sake


Say you so? I have then so little hope to make you see your fault, that I will
spend no more time about it. Your servant Sir, I must be going a little way.


Nay dear Lady, I had as good part from my better Angel.


What? these are your words of course? Pray let me go.


Nay, but in earnest Lady, you are the only party of all the world, in whose
enjoyment I could think all happiness confined


She were as fond that would belive. --


Slid, what shall I do now? -- Believe, do you say Lady? O could you but look
into my thoughts: the tortured wretch speaks not a truth more credible; the
latest breath of dying men is not so sincere as what I say. -- Believe me? it
would question your Discretion (Madam) to do otherwise; it cannot but be so in
nature; it is as impossible for you not to cause these passions in me, as for
fire not to burn a matter combustible


Language due by custom and long use. --


^Sfoot, what shall I do? she will outwit me this way, I must try another. --

Well Mrs. Crisis, come, the truth of it is, I love thee; thou art handsome
enough in conscience; and have a little too much wit for a wife; but I don't
doubt but I should rule it well enough: wherefore prithee keep no more fooling,
but let the Parson be doing


Well Sir, I will be as plain as you, it is possible you may love me, although
the language you have chosen to express your love in, has not (in my mind) a
little prejudiced it. For my part, I do hate none living, nor will I forswear
to marry you; but I must needs say, I am not yet quite resolved on it, in
things of such consequence I cannot too much consider. Pray let this for this
time suffice


Well then, if it must, I will leave you to consider until annon. You will go,
to Hide Park as you promised


I shall be ready to wait upon you.


In the mean time, let this make you think of me.


Nay, Mr. Welbred.


It Is but a trifle.


As when a close besieged Town, opening a secret Sally Port to receive some
scouting Spies, in rushes the pursuing enemy, and they with their Intelligence
receive their ruin: So I, through my too inquisitive ear have let in that
which cuts me to the heart. O Welbred! did I but know thee to be made
miserable? Or should I have been more wretched in not knowing thee? It is
impossible she should withstand a fresh assault; this Journey to Hide Park will
end the business, and begin my woe. -- But shall I like some neglected wretch,
left on an unknown shore, only look and stare after my happiness, that with
full gale is flying from me? Can there be nothing done, but to prevent this
present threatening mischief? O what? What shall I do

Stay, -- that would go nigh to do it, if not, it will however be a handsome way
to discover my affection, which custom has made (in me) immodesty to do. -- it
will be an odd kind of thing though; It is no matter, even nature bids us shun a
present danger, though we future hazards run.


What (Madam) is it a Massacre resolved, is killing one by one grown tedious
sport?


Did ever poor Sir John think thus to be abused?


Really Sir, it pleases you to speak far beyond my deserts.


O God, Madam, your Deserts are far transcending whatsoever I can say, Divinity
inhabits in your face, and your cheeks contain the Elixar of all perfection


I am confident Sir, it pleases you to say so.


Madam, I should esteem my self incomparably felicitous, if you would vouchsafe
to honor me this Afternoon with your company to Hide Park, and grace my Coach
with your transcendent beauty


Really my company will be no honor, but rather disgrace you.


I presume not so (Madam) -- for your Beauty does anihilatize all others.


Hark, Anihilatize, me thinks it is a pretty word.


It is a great deal of pity it should signify nothing.


For by this fair hand, Madam --


He is almost spent, I know by his beginning to toy with her, -- I will go and
relieve him.

Monsieur Lagul, your servant; What? making new Conquests? Have you no pity on
our Sex? If you go on thus, we shall look on you as on some common threatening
mischief that will destroy us all


It is my eternal felicity Madam, -- But I presume. --


You do indeed, to forget your old friends; What was the matter, I pray, we did
not see you in the Country according to your promise


Really, Madam, I did ruminate in my thoughts to kiss your hands, but fortune
was not so propitious to me as to favor me with that felicity. --


It favored her I am sure.


Why what was the matter?


I must confess (Madam) there has an accident or two fallen out of late, that
has taken me up, and made me extremely uncivil in this nature unto all my
friends; I shall certainly be weary of these Duels in the end, if it be but for
this cause


So, now he is in.


Then I see men sometimes feel your wounds as well as we. But I pray beware
left in the end we may all rue some unlucky thrust


These Duels (Madam) I must confess, are businesses of danger enough; but that
is a thing which he that values his honor and reputation, must not entertain a
thought of. -- But yet at the first, I must needs say, they seemed somewhat
strange; but now me thinks they are nothing, I look upon them as a mere
Exercise; I cannot scarce eat a Dinner with a good appetite until I have fought
one: They clearly save me forty shillings a Month unto my Fencing Master


Were I but now disposed to be merry.


But I pray let me persuade you out of them.


It Is impossible (Madam); for he that stands upon his punctillio's, must needs
run into them every day. I have fought two this we^k already, tomorrow I am to
fight a third, and I look for a Challenge to another every minute


Why, for Gods sake Sir?


I was yesterday (Madam) in the Afternoon at the Devil Tavern, there happened to
be some words exchanged between a Gentleman and my self; -- as I remember, he
called me, Empty prating Coxcomb: Upon that (Madam) by the rule of Honor I
could do no less then give him the Lie; I expected then that he would have
singled me out, and have wispered somewhat in my ear, but the ignorant fellow
nothing but flung a quart pot at my head, and kicked me down the stairs


Why, was not that enough?


No (Madam) the affront does yet lie clearly on his side, it was so resolved
afterward at the Golden-fleece


Me thinks that is somewhat strange.


Not at all, Madam, for the Lie is the highest affront that can be given, and
so is the French mode, for once FranCois de Valois, the French King, upon an
affront that Charles the Emperor put upon him, sent him a Challenge, in which
he gave him the Lie; the Emperor refusing to answer him, the French ever since
in Complement to their King have esteemed it the highest affront that can
possibly be put upon a man


But how came you off in the other Duels you said you have fought?


Very well, Madam: for the first it was a business of nothing; for at the very
first pas I disarmed my Adversary, and I not seeking after blood, but the
Vindication of my Honor, was content to receive reasonable satisfaction, the
acknowledgment that he had done me wrong, and so forth.


Who is that at the door?


But the other was like to have proved transcendently more periculous: for
(Madam) I stood upon my Guard thus. --


Bless us!


This (Madam) is Prince Ruperts Guard, -- He came ferociously upon me with a
Passado or two, which I putting off, run at him just thus, as my Lord Shandos
killed Compton. --


Villain! Draw upon a woman!


Hold Sir, he is but in jest.


In jest!


He knows it is against the Mode to make a quarrel among Ladies.


The Mode, you Coxcomb! --


Well let him go, for he is an Ass I Am sure, and so he ever will be, therefore
it were a folly for to trouble my self any more with him


He can fight I see, although he cannot talk.


Now, Sir, I am not altogether of your mind; though the Gentleman (I must
confess) does appear absurd enough, my Cozen and I though, are not altogether
out of hopes in time to make him a little more understand himself, somewhat I
think we have done already


It is impossible, Lady, except you should alter the Fabric of his mind,
unbend its appetite, or give it new desires; for as long as the divine soul
creating breath, is clad with different disposing matter, and cast in several
moulds, there will be Wise and Fools


Sir, if he were a natural Fool, I should yield much to your opinion, but in my
mind his chiefest unhappiness is, only to have set his mind on some odd
fancies, which if we could persuade him out of, he would be (at the least) not
ridiculous


Lady, it is likely you may know him a great deal better then I, for, I must
confess, altho^gh he be one that I see almost every day in the streets, yet of
all men living I have the least acquaintance with him: wherefore (Madam) if you
please to make my knowledge to be so far indebted to you, as to let me a little
more fully understand him, I shall take it as no mean favor


That Sir would be a very tedious task.


A tedious task! Why, what have you to do, I wonder?


That question I think may not be unnecessarily put to a Lady that is dressed,
and has dined, as I suppose you have


Well Cozen, if you will help me, I will venture on it then. And to begin, Sir
this Gentleman (as I have said) although he does appear ridiculous enough, yet
in my opinion not so much by nature as unlucky chance: for as when some common
metals will serve for good substantial use, yet if you strive to force them to
more curious shapes, they only such rude draughts will take as will render them
more deformed: So this Gentleman (had his courser soul but had the luck to have
acted in some downright way, to have managed some plodding Trade) he might by
long experience have understood himself within his Sphere; nay, have had wit
enough to have got a good Estate, and through the repute of that, have been
looked upon by the world as wise; but this by his fathers industry being left
to his hand, the common course of the world, unhappily does fling him upon
things fit only for more refined minds; which although he cannot master, yet
some odd grudges and imperfect stamps have transformed him from what he was,
nor can he be what he would


So (Sir) that some laugh at him, some wonder, as one would at some monstrous
thing; some, indigested vain attempt of Nature


And first Sir, his Fortunes enabling him to keep variety of company; he hears
indeed all sorts of wit enough, but that being a thing too subtle for his
soul, naught stays with him, but some few words and phrases, which he rudely
plucking from that natural chain that linck'd them with appropriating
circumstances, show very strangely


Not much unlike (Lady) the relics of those species, which (although in a
methodick way, and by the discursive hints of thought are represented to the
mind, yet) in a dream appear with casual consequence, the fancy making absurd
contradictions, whilst at one act it does rethink things treasured up in
different time and place


Right Sir; for with some conceited speech, he is your Servant; what e're you
answer, on he goes to what is next in h^s memory


Me thinks he sometimes puts me in mind of the Discourse between Clarangeus and
Al^idon, what e're Alcidon answered, Clarangeus went still on with the story of
his wooden window


But Sir, it is with Complements as with all things else, except they beget one
another, they are quickly at an end


His tongue indeed like the Germane Clockwork at Bartholmew Fair, is wound up
but for a season


You would take him for Friar Bacons head, made only to speak some certain
sentences


It may be so: for I must confess, for the most part, he does use strange,
high, and conjuring words; nor do I think his face wants brass


Conjuring! You shall have him Court his Mistress, as if she were a Lady in some
enchanted Castle. to be won with certain strange Ceremonies and mystical
speeches


When he i^ quite spent, he is wont to cry, O Lord. -- tell you, You are
mel^ncholy; -- but that we have almost laughed him out of; for now with some
fond protestation, he will say somewhat, which in effect shall be only a denial
of what you say


A little better then the Canterburry Fiddler, that would still cry, You lie Sir.


Then he will talk somewhat of News, or of the Weather, tell you it has not
rained of late; some common places of the cried up Wits and Beauties of the
Town, with certain formula's of censure on them all, may a little prolong his
Discourse


O^ if a Horse-Race chance to be, it serves in no small stead, (believe me) it
will keep him in good talk for at the least a week


You know, Cozen, what a stir he uses to keep sometimes with Trigunnel and his
Mare


But that which is his greatest labor, and which most perplexeth him to
attain, as the only thing which in his judgment renders him right Gallant and
most complete, is the punctilio Discourse, the Laws of Duel and the Sword


He thinks that if he could go handsomely through with a quarrel without
receiving a baffle, according to these Laws, he has done more, and has got
more honor and repute then e're Montross, the Sweden King or Scanderbag


Does Fury know a Rule? Anger a Law? Strange Tyranny is this, that thus does
passions aw! Great spirits know your wrongs, can you whose actions might
determine what is Valor, whose looks might daunt a fashion, and outstare the
Mode, whose names might make your deeds, though interferring ^ustome, regular?
Can you (I say) be governed by the paltry bylawes of a Tavern? Shall Honor,
that Spring of worthy minds, that just Reward of Courage, Pains or Art, be
measured by the dictates of a Crew able to degenerate the word, make it a term
for Cowards, or a talk to busy fools; a thing, a well tempered mind e're long
will scarce dare own. As I have known a man whose spotless life would seem to
question Adams fall, yet would he startle at the name of Godly, Saint or Holy.
But Lady, I doubt I have too much interrupted you


Not a whit, Sir.


There is not a quarrel about the Town, but he labors to get the exact History
of it; he will tell you its rise and growth, who gave the first affront, and
where it last did lie; together with the judicious observations of the Sword
men on it


Then he has strange Romances too of his own Adventures; there is no Scout,
Gazet or Weekly Intelligence will furnish you with more improbabilities.
Captain Jones was but a mere Ass to him


I, for yesterday me thought, he told a story that went beyond his wounding the
man in the Air


What was that, I pray Lady?


Why Sir, he said, as he was coming from Hide Park, there was five Bailiffes
beset his Coach, which he routed; but with what do you think


With his sword; what else?


No Sir, it was but a Ladies busk, that he said he had in his hand.


A pretty Instrument, and much in fashion with him of late.


He gives one ( Hadland, I think they call him) fifty pounds a year to keep him
company


That is, sometimes to countenance him, and keep him from a Baffle.


Hadland! Certainly I have heard of that same Gentleman.


It Is possible, Sir, for he is one of no less ^ame then worth, although his
decayed fortunes sometimes force him on unhandsome shifts


Is not that he you said to day Mrs. P. has been so much in love with?


The very same; he is one of the chief of our modern Hectors.


Hectors?


This it is to be so long in the Country; Do you not know what I mean?


Not I.


Why I mean a certain Order, more famous then that of Malta, the Garter, Saint
Esprit, or the Golden-fleece, a race of Adventurers, who, out of what strange
humor I cannot tell, have usurped the name of that famous Trojane Prince


A Prince! a Pander, a fellow was killed in the quarrel of a whore.


And afterward, Sir (as I have heard) dragged at a Carts tail.


Believe me, a very proper patron.


But whether is your Cozen gone?


The little Gentlewoman, Lady, went out presently after Mr. La-gul.


Poor silly Girl! She cannot though but put me in mind of my own folly, for (I
must confess) when I was of her years, I did not a little admire this same
Gentleman; but a little time did teach me more wit


Yet still you did retain him though --


Why such a one for some businesses, I will assure you, will not do amiss.


I must confess, for a walk or such a matter he may be as requisite as the
Satin-peticoat


And, believe me, I think a handsome young Gentleman, his hair neatly curled
and powdered, sitting beside one in the boot of a Coach with his hat in one
hand, may become the Coach as well, and be as necessary an appurtenance, as the
rich Scarlet Livery, or the plumed Lacqueyes; and for treatments and such kind
of things, you do not know the pleasure such a one may do


But Cozen, you are well enough served, for I have heard that he will talk a
little mystically sometimes; what, do you think men are fools, spend their
money for nothing? --


Well, Ladies, my knowledge is not a little engaged to you as to this Gentleman.


Truly Sir not much, no more then it would have been to a day or twoes
acquaintance with him


But (Lady) I had almost forgot, how stand your resolutions for to night?


If you please Sir, I shall be ready at eight a clock.


Lady, It Is a thing that company much improves. -- Wherefore if you please. --


I, I, she shall come.


Sir, It Is well you used that Argument, for I must confess, all that I can do
in company is but to add to the number


What must I say then? I have even pulled an old house on my head.

Your further acquaintance (Madam) may furnish me with better Arguments; but,
me thinks though, to help to increase a number is none of the worst things a
fair Lady is good for. Well (Ladies) seeing you do intend to meet, I must go
and take some order about things. -- But stay, what shall I do with this same
sword


Sir, if you please to leave it with me, I will see it restored.


I shall rely upon you(Lady) to do it.


How now Cuz? What think thou? What, is he a fool?


I must needs say, I was a little deceived in him. But stay, this Mr. Lagul is
as fit a man as I could possibly have thought of, and my having his sword, will
give me a good opportunity to crave this courtesy of him. I will go therefore
and find him out as soon as I can.


fucus, and the holy Varnish serve, with all Arts antic Wardrobe, but that
each soul must wear a natural mask, and such improving glosses and allaying
dashes, take from the nice sitting of this clayie Suit. Some whose flashy airy
souls (if by judgment grasped) like air come to nothing, yet meeting with
strange happy accidents, with a slye fallacy deceive even sober minds; each
action draws attention, and each word regard; Their talk, though vain and
empty, some odd, I know not what is, does so become and grace, that the deceived
fancy (as when one looks through some false mediums or abusing Optics) cannot
but conceit strange shapes of Wit, which else would not appear. But this same
Gentleman, (had not his better Fortune enforced my notice with a little
acquaintance) I had over passed him as one of the common things of the world,
but now, me thinks, I do begin to see a glimmering worth, though muffled with
disadvantages.


I Run him through the arm.


Who, I pray Sir?


The Gentleman I was talking of that I fought with.


Cry Mercy, I had almost forgot -- You were indeed a little interrupted in your
story


I, did you ever see so rude absurd a fellow, to make such a business before
Ladies? But that you protected him, Madam. --


We have told him of his fault, Sir.


Had not I been more knowing in my punctilio's, we might have been the Town
talk for this month


He does begin to see his Error.


He shall else: Is his name Knowel, say you? And does he lodge in Chancery Lane?


I think I heard him say so.


Stay, to morrow I must meet at Maribone Park.


What do you mean? the Gentleman has sent you your Sword, and by me does crave
your pardon, which I did oblige my self to get


This is as base as before he was uncivil; what does he take me for a footboy,
or a Porter, that I should put up an affront so? No (Madam) my Honor and
Reputation is engaged; I am a Gentleman, and must have the satisfaction of a
Gentleman


Nay, I pray Mr. Lagul.


O God (Madam) Honor is the life and soul of a Gentleman, it gives him being,
it is the very heart and vital heat that makes him act and move, and can no
more endure a wound. -- But (Madam) I must take my leave of you, for I have
engaged to meet at the Horn Tavern at three a clock, and now I think it is
somewhat past


Are you going thither? You may then do me a small courtesy.


Madam, I do esteem my self incomparably felicitous that my stars are so
benign as to make me capable of doing you any service


Sir, I had best to let you rest in that opinion until I have an opportunity to
requite you


Madam, I am your most eternal Bond-slave to do whatsoever you shall please to
imperate


I am (Sir) so much the more engaged.


Upon my Reputation (Madam) I do not conceive so. --


So now he has done.


But (Madam) what is that you would have me do?


You say (Sir) you are going to the Horn Tavern, -- there is a Gentleman there,
one Mr. Welbred


He that invited us last night?


The very same


He has not affronted her, I hope, she would not have me fight with him.


Only (Sir) there was a Letter I brought out of the Country for him, I quite
forgot to give it him the last night; but if you please to do me the favor to
deliver it. --


I am glad it is no more. --
It Is my ambition (Madam) to be subservient to you. -- But where is my Sword?

If you please to walk in (Sir) you shall have it.


Come this is the fairer Room, it looks toward the street.


I, so it does, we might have been here all this while.


Well, if this business succeed, now --


Succeed I Will death succeed to life, the day to night? It cannot but succeed:
'Slid, old Oughthred never did demonstrate a consequence so certain, as I could
this


But if he should prove an angry boy though, be mortal and wound unto the
death. --


Come fear nothing, I Will warrant he is as arrant a Coward, as ever wore broad
silver Belt


Pray God he be.


There is another Youth too of the same breed above, I dare swear, I do not
think but much good might be done upon him


But prithee let us make an end with one first.


But I wonder what Hadland ailes, to make us stay thus long.


He said he would be here almost an hour ago.


-- take his milksop pocky face, for me.


That pocky face shall pay for it, if thou will.


Shall us jeere the Rogue, and make him mad, as we use to do?


I have this night studied some new matter for his purled taffeta countenance.


But take heed you do not provo^e him unto fury.


I Will warrant you: do you think I do not know the man? -- But stay, I think he
comes yonder


I, there he is, but I do not see the Gentleman that he said he would bring
with him;

Come, you are a trusty Card in faith Dick, did not you promise upon your word
you would be here an hour ago


Promise upon my word, quoth the man! What do thou take me for a Scrivener,
that I should mind such things as words and promises


A Scrivener! No, Di^k, I do not think thou art a Scrivener: but yet I must
tell you, thy face does look not much unlike the blank side of a Bond


Not quite so smooth, in my opinion.


Come you shall contrive no more of these stratagems, if you can look no better
upon them


The truth of it is, I did a little disorder my self the last night.


Disorder thy self! Why? what did thou go to bed without being drunk?


At nine a clock without a Wench?


No that he did not, if the Madam in Lincolnes-Inne-fields say true. What saint
thou Dick


Why, I hope you are not my Ghostly Father.


No Dick, I think thou look a little more Ghostly of the two.


An absolute Ghost, I vow: had he but a Surplice and a Torch, he needs no Chalk.


Chalk! -- he looks like any. --


Come out with all thy paltry old Similies, and then we shall have done. What
is it, Ashes, tallow Candle, Green Cheese


Well, Green Cheese let it be then, if thou will: but if thy face be a Green
Cheese, the Cheese-cloth was somewhat course


Why prithee?


Because the coat is so rugged.


Why Dick? -- But what if it be a Candle?


What if it be a Candle! Was there ever such a question heard of? Why do thou
not kick him Hadland? he asks, What if thy face be a tallow candle


He will give me leave to put the case I hope, I do but suppose.


Well then, suppose it were a candle: stay -- why then I say, it would be a
Christmasse on^


I, for it is all wrought crinckum, cranckum.


Come, the face is a face, and may be a face.


It may be (I grant) when it is finished.


Finished!


I, for yet i^ is but rough cast.


Come, it is no matter what the face is, or how it looks, I am ^ure if it had
not been for him that ows the face, you might have both looked like Asses ere
this


As we did the other night when the Sussex Gen^leman beat us. --


Was not I the man, who when we were quite blown up by those same City Rogues:
And we had been in three days consultation whether we should turn brethren of
the Highway, down right beggars, or hang our selves: Was not I the man (I say)
that found out this same Youth, this precious Squire, of whom within this week
we have won some ninescore pounds, besides the expectation of this business


Well, for my part (I say) the man speaks reason, and ought not to be so abused.


Yes, one touch more.


Come, out with it then, man.


I say, if we had turned brethren of the Highway, as he said, he for his part
might have robbed without a Handcherchief


Why, prithee now*


-- One would take h^^ face for a piece of Holland.


It must be purled then.


Come, are you not ash^med to abuse your brother Hector thus?


You a Hector?


What am I else?


That wan pale sprightl^s^ thing dr^w Pri^ms curt^in in the mid of night, and
told him half his Troy was burnt


O Lord, why Dick what sai^^ t^ou?


Why this Dick says, -- And first for you, you Rascal, Do you remember what
you were when first I knew thee? a lean, starved, thin-gut, threadbare Rogue,
that had never a rag to cloth thy body, nay, scarce a body to thy soul: Do you
remember where I found you? Clapped up in the Fleet for forty shillings, that
thou owedst in Ram-Alley for chippings of bread and porrage, when thou,
Camelion like, had for some days lived by nothing but air, and were just
resolving into thy first principles? Did not I pay this dribling debt for thee,
set thee free, and since have made thee the man thou art? I must confess, I
saw a good hopeful cozening countenance in thee, that did promise much


Come, a truce, a truce.


No you Rogues, since you have provoked me, you shall repent it. And as for you
my friend, with you I have been somewhat longer acquainted, I think I knew thee
in the late Wars, thou went by the name of Captain, a thing could do
nothing but drink and damn thy self, and run away, so monstrous a Coward, that
thy prodigious fears were able to work upon the genius of an Army; And this you
shall confess, or else I will beat it out of you


Well, hold, I do confess here before my friend then, that I am a Coward, and
thou art a terrible child of war; so thou will let me alone, thou shall be no
more Dick Hadland, but a furious Hector or Achilles, any thing what thou will:
thy pock holes shall be no more pock holes, but skars of dreadful Mars


Why Dick?


Characters of honor in which may be read full mighty acts of Chivalry.


Characters say thou? it is some strange Oriental tongue; Stay, let us see, I
think they are the Egyptian Hieroglyphics


No it is Greek, for I think they are all Omegaes, Hadland.


Sir, There is a Gentleman below would speak with you.


With me? I Will warrant it is Mr. La-gul. Prithee desire him to come up.


I will Sir.


I must now vanish then.


Stay, I will go meet him.


Will you meet him, say you?


What should I do else?


Will he fight?


So he says.


So now you have made a fine business.


Come I Will warrant you, La-gul sit down, here is a health to all our friends in
the other world, you will remember me to them all.


What do you mean?


You will meet him, you say.


I shall be posted else: And I shall lose my honor and reputation.


I it is true, but --


But what?


'Slid, you had as good meet Jove armed with Thunder, the sheers of Atropos:
the dart of death it self is not half so fatal as his Rapier


Say you so?


The Sword of Justice strikes not so certain; no fore man of a Jury could
breathe more sure destruction


If it be so, in my mind the Gentleman has a great cause of comfort; for to
know the certainty of his death, is that which many a good Christian prays for
all his life long


It Is well you put him in mind, for certainly it is time for him to begin to
forsake the flesh, the world and the Devil. --


Some Ghostly Father indeed were fitter company for him then we.


No, no, Mr. La-gul, I say, drink on, it may be your last* -- We will meet
somewhere to morrow before you go, and sing a Psalm, and it will be well
enough, I Will warrant you


Nay, but Mr. Hadland. --


Come Mr. La-gul, to deal plainly and seriously with you, you have chanced upon
a man that has not his fellow, I am confident in the Kingdom; he is absolutely
one of the greatest Duellifts about the Town


Prithee who is it, Mr. Hadland? --


One Caster, as I take it, his name is*


Caster! I have heard indeed very much of the man, he came lately out of France.


I, the very same, he killed a great Monsieur there in a Duel the last Summer,
and was pardoned by the King for the gallant service he did against the
Spainiard at the siege of Arras


I believe he is fain to leave France now upon some such account, I have heard
somewhat. --


Nay to my knowledge he has killed some of our own fellow Subjects, but that he
has had the luck to carry things closely


The truth of it is, the Gentleman is a gallant spirited Gentleman; but he has
one humor in his fighting that I do not so well like of


What is that I pray, Sir?


When once he is in the field he will make the utmost use of all advantages, he
never spares any man


I have heard that very thing dis^uted with him diver^ time^, but he says it
is the only Mode b^yond se^; crye^, Un enemy le m^indre


But me thinks (Sir) that it does not savor so much of magnanimity; true
Valor should never think upon enemies in the way of fear


What should I do then, Gentlemen, in this case?


Nay, for my part, I cannot tell.


Truly Sir, your condition in my opinion is somewhat desperate*


This it is, when you will venture upon quarrels when I am not with you.


Venture! I could not possibly avoid it, I did but deny to lend him forty
pounds, and straight he called me base uncivil fellow; and told me I did not
like a man of honor


I think so; could you expect any other consequence? 'Slid, could any man have
been guilty of such an uncivility


What, to deny a man I never saw before?


It was no matter, he looked like a Gentleman.


Upon that (you know) I could do no less then give him the Lie, and so the
business began. For my part, I thought I might safely have done so, for I am
sure I saw a Gentleman beat him not above an hour before


Beat him! -- 'Slid, Slur, what shall I say? What a Rogue is this he did not
tell us of it? --


No, there was no such matter here, for the Gentleman was at play with him,
when on the sudden he told him he was a Cheat, and gave him a blow on the pate
with a Candlestick


And did he do nothing, say you? -- Pox what shall I say?


No, nothing.


You cannot tell what new Mode of quarrelling he may have brought over with him
from France


Strike him! if there be not some such matter in it, he had as good have
struck fire into a Magazine


Well then, I am resolved.


What to do?


I will not fight.


How! Not fight!


No.


Nay, now we have over done the business.


Prithee have but a little patience,


I say, I will not fight.


What is all the pains that I have taken with you lost? Will you with one act
forfeit all your Honor


Honor! hang it, I am almost weary of it.


Do not you value your reputation?


I cannot tell what to do, it does every day so endanger my life.


Your life? Can there be a life without it? To live to be the scorn of men, is
worse then a hundred deaths. Can he be said to live, that is not fit company
for a Footboy, that will be howted and laugh^d at, and posted for a Coward


I care not, let them post me; it is but going into the Country for a while, or
giving out that I am gone to travel, as you know one did not long ago in such a
case


No, that will not do, for you would as soon avoid your own shadow as him, no
troubled conscience could more closely pursue you, divine Justice would not so
soon ^ind out the wicked as he would you: 'Slid, 'twas but the last Summer he
followed from France, quite through Germany, into Italy, one that he had never
seen, neither had the least affront past betwixt them, merely out of a generous
humor, because he heard he was a man of Arms


What shall I do then?


Come, Mr. La-gul, the truth of it is, your Quarrel was not an hour old before
I heard of it; and I being extremely sensible of your danger, began to think
how I might possibly procure your safety, at the last came into my mind a
Gentleman, one that is an intimate friend of this same Casters, whom I have
some acquaintance with. And to be short, I did a little feel him, to see
whether he would be a means of taking up this matter, but --


What?


Why, to be short, he I believe has heard that you are a man of Estate, and he
it seems has had an ill hand of late, and is a little out of money, and so he
thinks to take an advantage of this opportunity to request a courtesy of you


What, would ^e borrow any money?


He talked as if he wanted 200. --


200 l. I cannot Sir by no means, you know how much I have lost of late.


That is all one, he knows your credit is good; and if you should deny him this
small favor, he is somewhat a humoursome fellow, and I cannot tell whether
ever I should persuade him to serve you in this same business; and yet I know
he is the only man that can do it


I could spare now some twenty pounds, what if I offered to give him so much
outright? would not he rather have it, do you think


By no means. 'Slid, What? offer to give a Gentleman money? for ought I know he
might take it for an affront, and then there would be another business


An affront say you! nay, I will take heed how I run into any more of these
affronts; -- But if there be no remedy, I shall refer my self unto you in
this same matter


I will do my utmost endeavor to see what can be done then. -- But what
quarrel was that you were a telling me you fell into this afternoon


Why there was a rude, uncivil fellow abused me; but because it was in the
company of some Ladies, I let him alone; but I believe I must challenge him. --


Why, what was the matter, for Gods sake?


Why this same Gentleman (I know not for what cause) on the sudden fell upon
me, and took away my sword


I hope not so: Would you let him take away your sword?


How could I avoid it, except I had made a quarrel before the Ladies, and that
you know I must not do


O excuse me Sir: In your own defense you might.


Might I in mine own defense, say you? -- That I had but known so much! --
Well, but what is to be done as the case now stands


As the case now stands, you cannot challenge him, for a man in Honor is
supposed to have but one sword


That is pretty, I vow. -- That I could but think on these things my self! --
But he has restored me to my sword again


Nay, then you must, for he has restored you to your former condition. -- But
stay, upon what terms did he give it you? What said he


He said nothing to me, for he sent it by a Lady.


A Lady! I cannot tell how that same circumstance may alter the matter. -- Stay
Mr. Slurre, here is a pretty case, a Gentleman is dis-armed, and then the party
that dis-armed him, s^nds him his sword again by a Lady; what do you think of
it


What say you Sir? A Gentleman is dis-armed, and then his sword is sent him
again by a Lady


I, that is (as I take it) the case.


I, that is the case.


Why then the first thing that will be considerable is, whether the Law of
Honor takes notice of a Lady; for you know Sir all Laws look on some persons,
as in Iure nu^^as


But in my opinion, thereafte^ ^s she may be qualified, the Law of Honor may
take notice of her


As how I pray, Sir?


Was there ever blood drawn in her quarrel?


then there may arise a question, whether that blood were drawn in the field,
or no


You say true. -- This I see will be somewhat a difficult case; wherefore (I
think) we had best to stay till night, when we may have the opinion of all our
brethren


Well, I see there is somewhat in these Laws, if I could but understand them.


Somewhat do you say? they are beyond what Solon or Lycurgus ever made.


If you be not knowing in these, although you were more valiant then Hercules,
you might be resolved a Coward


Were John of Gaunt now living, one of our subtle Duel Casuists would baffle
him with a qu^rk


Turn the affront upon him cleerl^, in despite of his sword and buckler.


Well, I must leave you, for I have a little business with a Gentleman that is
above. -- But Mr. Handland, do you think this Gentleman would take it as an
affront, if I should offer to pay ^he reckoning


I cannot tell, you had best to leave some money with me.


Your servant Sir, I shall think my self super-eminently happy in your farther
acquaintance; and therefore I shall not be a little ambitious of it


Sir, I shall prevent your desires.


I could wish that I had but the felicitous fortune to be any way
subserviceable to you


I shall esteem it no mean honor to be your servant.


Really Sir, I presume you think not so.


Well, go thy way, God send thee more wit, and me more money, as they use to say.


Money you rogue! What would you have? Have we not now 200 pounds? Two hundred
pounds! me thinks it sounds very roundly; but that we have forsworth it, we
might go purchase Manors, you Rogue, Lands and Tenements


-- take your Lands and Tenements, give me an Ass with a thousand pounds a
year, '^is the only revenue in the world, it comes in clear without any taxes


But if we go on thus, I know no reason but that they should rate us to the
poor of the pari^h for him


Such a lad indeed is a frank tenement that Plowden never dreamt of.


A frank-tenement! A fee-simple rather.


Two or three such youths, a^ I live, if I had but a mind to marry, were a
jointure sufficient for a lass of a thousand pounds


Why, there is another, just such a one, in my conscience, not far off.


I remember you were speaking some such matter to day.


Nay, I have enquired more of him since, and I hear he has at the least fifteen
hundred pound a year, besides some good sums in his purse


Such a one, my boy, might be worth our notice: but what shall we do to him?


Faith, even modo quo prius.


Nay hold, all men are not a^ike: *Slid, he may be terrible and valiant, a
child of courage and the sword


Do take me for a Fool or an Ass? Do you think I do not know men's tempers?
He cannot in nature but be a Coward. Did I not see him the other day with a c^p
buttoned up on one side, and a Feather in it, upon a horse with a great saddle,
at Hide Park? besides, did I not hear him to day talk of his Honor and
Reputation


They are shrewd signs, I must co^f^^se. --


Come, let it happen as it will, I will take the business upon my self; and
let the worst come to the worst, he shall not have a child to deal with


Spoke like a Hector, and thy self, brave Hadland. -- But stay, shall I go call
Caster, and tell him of our success


Hold: Shall we fright the Rogue a little, and make him believe he must fight?


It will be rare, I vow. But here he comes.


How now, my Lads? What is the matter you look thus sober? How go affairs?


Faith, even scurvily enough. --


Why? He will not fight? Will he?


Fight! He was ready to fight with us two but for asking him the question.


Fight, do you say! He was got, I think, betwixt two furious Armies in the heat
of Charge: he thinks, he speaks, he talks of nothing else but fighting


In the while that he was here with us, but that we carried our selves
discreetly, he would have given us twenty occasions of the Challeng


I looked out after him, and I saw his Sword out twice, merely upon some
trifl^ng business, of a justle, or the wall


We have a great deliverance I think: for my part, I never was in the company
of such a furious terrible boy since the hour I was borne


Come* I am confident ^ou did not your parts handsomely; you did not fright him
enough. --


Fright him, say you! I am sure I made thee such a dreadful thing, that I dare
swear, had thou but heard me, thou would have been afraid of thy self
this twelve month


But that was so far from frighting of him, that it wrought an effect quite
contrary, in stirring up a noble emulation in him: he swore such a one as I
described thee to be, he would go through the world bu^ he would find out


He blessed himself, that at the length he had the luck to to light upon one,
in whom his sword might find some resistance, or in whose death he might gain
some honor


-- Take you ( Hadland) this was your doings.


Nay, prithee be not angry, I for my part did all for the best.


The best! Hang you, you knew it could not be otherwise.


Nay, do not judge of a business by the success.


What do you think I shall do now?


In troth I cannot tell, -- Now the matter is so far gone there is no flying
off, you must even go through


What? Would you have me fight?


Why not?


Do you ask why? You know it is against my nature: fight (quoth you!) I tremble
at the very word


Alas poor man! --


Come, come, even fight, and if thou chance to fall, I will see thee honorably
buried on the common stock


Fight! What would thou do else? Have thou not lived long enough?


I must confess, if I had been in his condition, I think I should have hanged
my self some years ago


Have thou not lived to spend a fair estate, that h^th kept thy Ancestors in
good repute for many ages


Ha^t thou not lived by thy profane debauchnesse, and base cowardlinesse to
help to sink a cause in which we all do suffer


Nay, now you are a little too serious, Dick.


Hang him, I would I could say any thing that would mad him, for jeering of my
face


Nay, then have at him. -- What do thou live for? but to be a Moth and Canker
to thy Country? --


So it is well.


To perve^t and seduce her youth?


O that my heart would but give me leave to fall upon either of these Rogues.
--

You damned Villains must you abuse me too? -- But there is no tr^f^^ng in this
matter; I must go see what may be possibly done for to prevent it.


Shall we call him back again?


No, let the Rascal alone in his fears until we meet anon at night.


Well, here is a Health to the Rogue howsoever. --


Come on: But you know whom we are to meet withal at night; we had not best to
be too busy, for they are Lads we shall do no good upon, except we first drink
them up pretty high


Well, as you will. -- But what becomes of your business?


O things are in an excellent posture; what will you say, if before night I have
my Land again


It Is impossible.


Well, Do but mark the motions, and observe consequences.


But how can it be man, that thou should ever make such an Ass of that old,
wary, subtle fellow


You are deceived in him, he is not so subtle as you think for; he is as fine a
dull and stupid piece of matter as you would wish to work upon: I grant you,
for this many ^ears he has had the luck to be much employed in his way. And
although he never read Cook nor Perkins, yet I cannot tell by what conspiracy
of the world, he has been that way accounted very knowing, so that for this
many years he has heaped up huge sums, and now I think is owner of some Two
thousand Pounds per annum; through the repute of which Estate he has been
lately made a Justice. --


For all this, if thou bring this about, thou will be more f^mous then he
that cozened the Jew, the Jugler, and the Broker in Long-lane


Well, do but go a long with me; and you shall know how all the matter is, for
you have a part to act this Afternoon, which you must do before we meet them we
promised.


What should this mean?

Well (Sir) you will be pleased to tell you^ friend, I shall not fail at the
appointed time: and place. -- You are not ignorant, I suppose, of the business


Sir?


I say, I will not fail to meet him. --


Upon my honor (Sir) I cannot guess your meaning, I was only desired to
deliver it unto you


You will know more then I believe; for certainly you are the friend he means
to bring along with him


I the friend! -- Really, as I am a Gentleman, I do not apprehend you.


No? that is strange; why the Gentleman does challenge me.


'Sfoot, am I falling into another D^el?


But you say, you know nothing? --


Upon my reputation, not I.


Well (Sir) Your Serva^t. I m^st go find o^t what this does mean.


Well, certainly in the end I shall be weary of this same Honor, it is such a
dangerous thing; I am no sooner out of the hazard of one quarrel, but straight
I run into another; I cannot do anything, scarce move, or stir, or speak, but
it is ready to bring me endanger of a Duel; one quarrel I fell into yesterday,
another to day, and now they are drawing me into a third. Well, to prevent
them, I will even take a Coach and go with my little new M^stresse to Hide Park
as I promised her.


Stay, -- Whether do I go? If I fight, what shall I hazard? My estate, my life,
my soul; for (as I am taught) I shall offend as well the Laws Divine, as
Civil: If I do not, I shall be wounded in my honor. My Honor* I, what is
that? for I must confess (the word of late has been so abused, that) I scarce
can tell. However, this I am sure of, that each man does naturally addict
himself to make a choice of some way gaining a repute with others; in which, if
he receive a check, there is nothing can more undervalue him; he being
supposed to choose that in which he most excelled. I therefore, being a man of
that condition, that does pretend unto a sword, must run all hazards, rather
then be foild in that

Now it is true, one that has employed his endeavors to ra^se a same another
way, might pass over such a business as this, and perhaps it would not at all
reflect on him

But these kind of men are not competent Judges of what in us they call rash;
for we shall see, when any thing does happen that does concern them in the
way they have taken for to acquire a value and esteem, They will act things as
strange and inordinate: You shall have a man made up of meekness; A man,
whose life and doctrine preaches nothing else but patience and compliance unto
others; yet he will venture for to ^end both Church and State, nay, tear the
world in pieces, rather then yield himself worsted in one silly argument

I must then fight!

Ha! What said I? fight!

Me thinks the word does carry horror in it; I may be kil^'d, or (which is
worse) I may kill

However, it is an action scarce consistent with humanity; Yet, my unlucky
fortune will force me on it; for were I one who already had satisfied the world
of my courage, I might then perhaps pretend a conscience, yet preserve my
honor

But being as I am, a fresh and raw young man, whose deeds will be looked upon
without the countenance of former actions, Conscience ( I say) will appear but
a lame and pitiful excuse.


She has an acute and handsome wit, a judgment too, not usual in a woman,
then which there is nothing does more touch my fancy; and yet, She wants not
that which we call Beauty, that most divine proportion, that does so lively
strike our souls

Nay, I needs must say, this was the only thing which at the first put me to a
stop, and would not let me pass her over, as other common things: But now, a
more noble Idea does so fully represent it self, that I scarce feel its force
at all; Nor does it move me, more then those trivial petty ends, which in my
child^sh ignorance I have pursued, would now stir me: Nor is this strange;
for certainly, Beauty's chiefest (if not only) Empire, is at the first; but
afterward, it yields unto, and is regulated by what farther conversation does
produce. For, without doubt, had she now all the deformity that age, or erring
nature ever yet produced, I should make her my choice; and those impressions,
that by the little acquaintance I have had with her, she has made in my mind,
would so overruled my fancy, that in despite of the world, I should account
her fair.


Stay; yonder he comes.


Come, shall we go meet him?


Why how now Sir? What is the matter?


-- Do you ask questions?


Was ever man thus abused? I will dye a thousand times rather then suffer this
-- you base uncivil villain. --


They are gone, but yet they have left somewhat behind them; for I do bleed a
pace; the heat they have put me into, has bo^l'd my blood up unto that height,
that it will all run over; well, I must go get a Surgeon as soon as I can. --

It does bleed more and more, and I begin to grow weak and faint; The fatal
hour does certainly draw nigh; for me thinks I do begin to feel my life run out
with my blood. --

And now as when some impressions that the fancy does by day receive, (other
objects continually plying the sense) are not at all, or else but dully
sensible, but at night appear more fresh then ever

So, now me thinks, some odd kind of thoughts, which in the earnest pursuit of
those things, my youth addicted me unto, I scarce did mark, (now I am going to
my eternal rest) begin to stare upon me, and look somewhat strange. --

What a high piece of madness have I done, thus to lose my life about a
trifle! I say, my life; that which is the chiefest good in nature, that to
which all other goods are but subservient; nay, are not at all without it? What
competent end then can any man propose in hazarding of it, since in all reason
that for which we hazard should be of more value then that we hazard

What dishonor had it been to me, if by my wife declining I had given some
cause to think I had feared them, more then if in such case I had avoided a
Bear or Ox; for Honor, certainly, is nothing else but that respect and value
that those things do draw, which buoy and prop one up in the world. Th^s
Wealth, Authority, good Friends* and Knowledge, (furnishing us with those means
by which the great^st actions are performed) must needs beget a reverence and
esteem: but the force of the body is (without doubt) the most inconsiderable
thing possible; he that enjoyes the greatest share of it, how small a power
does he thereby acquire? We see he must be subject to each petty Constable; nay,
a dagger or a pistol makes the weakest equal to him: It Is true, those
powerfuller arts of the more nobler part are to be honored and admired. These
many times with strange subtleties unite into one commanding power particular
strengths, and being united, with as much cunning obtain its rule and Masterie.
These flights we see, do make even weak, decrepit age, often formidable to* and
therefore honored by the world. -- Had I this way employed! -- But oh! --


Help, help the Gentleman.


What, is he dead?


Almost, I think: look how he is wounded!


Me thinks I should know him: I, certainly he is a customer of my Masters, and
he lodges in Chancery Lane


We had best then to carry him thither.


Pull out his hand-kercheife to help stop the blood.


Look, what is that? you had best to read it.


What is this? I think it is a challenge.


A Challenge! Jesu bless us; then it seems this was some duel:

Will these Gentleman never leave off these same scurvy Duells? -- But we had
best to make haste whilst he has any blood left in him


I heard, Lady, that with much earnestness, he seemed to enquire for me at my
lodging; and therefore because I think I heard you say he would be here about
this time, I came hither to see what he would have with me


The truth of it is, he appointed to come hither, and go to Hide Park with me;
but since he has sent his man to desire me to excuse him, because there was a
business of consequence fallen out, that he was to go about


Then all that I can say to it, is that he has made me lose a little pains.


And so truly he has me, for I have been almost this hour a dressing myself,
thinking to go with him


That were a great deal of pity, Lady, that any pains you have taken should be
in vain; rather then so, if you will please to give me leave to wait upon you
thither, although it be a place that I do but little frequent; yet Lady, upon
this occasion, I shall not a little desire it


By no means Sir, I would not put you to that trouble. --


Nay, if that be the only obstacle.


I beseech you Sir. --


Come Lady, it is the first request I ever made to you, and I will not be
denied


Nay, if you will not, I cannot tell what to say to it. --


And whither, and whither, I pray, in all this haste?


Only a little way, Sir, with this Gentleman.


A little way! And why am not I good enough to know?


We were a going to Hide Park.


To Hide Park? I thought it was some such place you were going to, you were so
bedecked and trimmed up with all your Jin-combobs; will you never leave following
of these idle fashions? -- Come, stand out in the light a little. Hey da! What,
powdered and patched again? have not I time and time forbad you ever to do so?
off with them, I say, those filthy blaines and scabs of pride, -- off with
them, or I will pull them off


Nay, I beseech you Sir, with your pardon; I must needs say you are a little
too severe, in not letting her please her fancy in these kind of things


Mr. Know-well, I ever have had that opinion of you, that I do not a little
wonder, that you, of all men, should speak thus if you speak according to your
Judgment


Sir, for my part, I speak what I think; for certainly, you have little reason
to blame her thus


Reason? though to her my will is reason sufficient; yet I would not have you
believe that I speak without a cause. For do you think it does become a sober,
civil, modest Virgin, as I hope she is, to follow all the several fashions,
those fantastic changes, and whimsical dances led by the vain and emp^y part
of the world


Sir, for my part I could wish our habits were as constant as the course of
nature, nor that we had more change of dress then birds or trees; but this I
can but wish; for we see the general humor of the world ever yet has been so
set upon the contrary, that one can scarce discreetly hope it; nay, he that
would but a little strictly enquire and search into our natures, and mark how
prone and apt they are for variety and change, might almost demonstrate its
impossibility; for certainly, as long as in the world there are men of several
qualities and degrees, the inferior, and more base will imitate the ways of
those of better rank, and strive to entrench upon, and gain their customs;
which being no sooner got by the one, but the other will despise them, and seek
for new. Seeing then these alterations are so unavoidable, without doubt, it
will more become one in a moderate way to yield unto, then vainly to oppose
them. For whatsoever the riged do pretend, there is nothing can more argue a
fantastic humor, or self-conceited pride, then with ones single whimseys to
oppose what is received by the generality


It Is true Sir, I needs must yield thus far, for I should condemn her of the
height of folly, should she oppose the general use in things that are
indifferent: but that I chiefly blame her is, for certain knacks and fashions,
which although in common use and custom, yet not being decent and comely in
themselves, must needs be unlawful


That, Sir, is impossible; for custom is the very square and rule of what is
decent, and what not; indecency being nothing else but that harsh discord that
any thing does make, if it does chance to interfere with the common course of
things, and certainly, the soundest judgments will not hold any habit to be
simply in its self unlawful. Thus much, indeed, must be granted, that some
attires, by being first used by (and therefore being reckoned for the badges
of) the vainer and more fantastic sort, may from them acquire some accidental
scandal, which afterward (they growing into use, with the sober and more
staid) by the same reason they must needs mew and let fall


This Sir, is somewhat strange; for although I cannot tell to what narrow limits
you may confine the word decency in its strictest notion, yet there is nothing
more certain then that there are vain, light, and immodest habits, of their
proper nature abstracted from all those glosses that custom may fl^ng on them


Truly Sir, I think not, nor I believe will you, if you but consider the
business a little more; for vanity is nothing else but the affectation of the
signs of those things we really have not; as in attires, if the aged do usurp
what does belong to youth, the poor to the rich, the inferior to the more
N^ble. Now Sir, what is it that does define to each of these their several
Characterizing Ga^bes, but use and arbitrary Custom? And so far is any habit
in it self from representing what is grave or light, that should it please
Omnipotence, (as there is nothing impossible) but to invert the common course
of Nature, make those the marks of age, which are now of youth; the smooth
chin would then be as reverend, as is now the bald head; Then should you have
the grave and venerable s^lver hairs be worn in amorous wanton Bracelets.
Nay, nothing in this kind, but as to these respects, would have its alteration

And as for Modesty; It Is true, although it be a virtue alike requisite in
all; yet, what those things are wherein it is exercised, Custom does only
determine: You see here that familiar with our coyest, nicest Dames, which, in
some places, would scarce be done by the most notorious strumpets; nay, what
many times with us is but necessary, how strangely would it look in the other
sex? And I would feign know that man could give me a solid reason of this
difference besides common custom. I am sure there can be no habit whatsoever
fancied to be so immodest, as we should now account none at all to be; yet
there are some that with no slight reasons will maintain our only natural
dress (were it but backed by a ^^nerall Custom) would be the most innocent;
and those desires which by restraint are now chiefly inflamed, would then grow
cold and dull, as we see some things which elsewhere are accounted a
recompense sufficient for a stab, here through there facility are scarce
valued; Nor was it said amiss of one who called clothes a mere device hatched
in Madam Venus Closet; -- for surely they are the greatest stratagem by which
her Empire does subsist


I must confess, Sir, you do represent some things unto me, which before I
did not so clearly mark; But yet (Sir) were it granted, that custom were the
only rule for what were to be done in these kind of matters, yet those things
for which I did find fault with her, have nor obtained a general use; for if
we should go presently into the stree^s, we should see not one in forty use
them


Herein, Sir, does lie the grand mistake; for as many several sorts of men,
the various accidents of for^une does produce; so many several fashions does
common use alo^; nor is this more then what has been provided for by public
laws, in the best ordered Commonwealths. Now Sir, If in my attire I do
conform myself to those of my degree, I never shall offend against the rule of
decency; and for my part, I see nothing in her dress, but what for some while
has generally been done by the civillest Ladies of her years and quality,
especially in this place; for I must confess, that may be star'd at in a
Country town, that here would be but needful. And this discourse, Sir, does
put me in mind of what I have known to have been the opinion of some Judicious
men, that the dress which of these late years has been in request amongst us
(what e're the aged out of their usual vanity of magnifying their younger
years will say to the contrary) is the civillest, most comely, and less
extravagant that has been used for these many ages


Well daughter, Mr. Know-well has so well pleaded for you, that I am content
that you shall follow your own humor, for this day at the least. -- And if you
do go, you had best to go presently, lest it be late before you come home,
for I can tell, you the air is very sharp


Your servant Sir. --


God bu'ye, good Master Know.


Now Mrs. you have no more to do, then to take out execution, for you have a
judgment of 5310 pounds. -- Believe me, your adversary was like to have served
you but a crafty Citizens trick of it, if I had not bestirred my self for you


He that does command you to plead the cause of the Widow, Sir, I hope, will
reward you. --


But what was the reason, I pray Mrs. that your husband did entrust him with so
great a sum


Sir, going to the late Wars, and fearing what hazard he might thereby run,
did think he might have relied upon this man's fidelity, (he being his very
intimate friend) little imagining that he would have proved such a wicked
knave, as to have cozened me his poor wife. --


Peace, Mrs. for seeing the matter has succeeded so well, you have little cause
to weep


I Sir, It Is true: but whenever I think of the good man, I cannot forbear, O!
little did he think I should ever have been put to all this trouble and
vexation


But the maine point now will be, whether this man be responsible?


O Sir, that is not to be questioned, for he is on^ you cannot look upon, but
you must think of thousands, a fat, greasy Burgo-master, he commonly goes in
a ruff, and a black pinked Satan doublet, you had as good doubt of my Lord
Major, and all the Aldermen; the public Faith would not take up so much upon
the Exchange, as his word


It Is well, if it be so. -- But Mrs. where be those writings you sent for me to
look upon


You shall see them presently Sir. --

Sue, bring me the little black Trunk in my Chamber. --.

Here they be, Sir, some old writings of my husbands, I would be glad to know
what they mean. --


Forsooth, your brother is below with another Gent. they are newly come out of
the Country


My brother!


But Hea^k you hither, sweet heart; do you remember what you promised me.


I* Sir, and if I durst, I could say somewhat.


Durst? Why, what is the matter?


O Lord Sir, I am afraid she will be angry.


Come, come, I Will warrant you: Here.


O Sir, You are a Noble Gentleman, and for your sake, I will venture her
displeasure. The truth of it is, Sir, (but I hope you will not say I said so.


No, no, do not fear.


Well, Sir, I dare swear she loves you.


Say you so? Stay, here is somewhat more for you.


I, Sir, for she does nothing but talk what a grave, comely, old Gent. you
are, and very like her first husband


Why, was her first husband an old man?


O, I Sir* or else he never had had her, for I think there never was woman of
so strange a humor as she is, in this world; for from her infancy, she ever
doted on old men; I have heard her say, that in these her late Law-troubles, it
has been no small comfort to her, that still she has been conversant with
grave Counselors and Sergeants, and what a happiness she has had to look
sometimes an hour together upon the Judges. She will go and walk a whole
afternoon in Charter-house-Garden, on purpose to view the ancient Gentlemen
there

And if she hear but of a man that is buried with as many old men following
him, as he is years old, she will go a mile to see it: There is an old beggar
that uses to come hither sometimes that she will talk with an hour together:
sometimes she will condole her self that she did not live before the flood,
that she might have had one of those ancient Patriarks; the last year she was
scarce persuaded, but that she would take a Journey into some of the far
Northern Nations, where men do ordinarily live unto seven or eight score years
of age. As we were coming by S. Dunstans not long ago, she spied the Picture of
old Par, she needs would have the Coach stay until she had bought it, and since
she has hung it up in her Closet, and will weep sometimes over it an hour
together


Nay, if this be true, I cannot tell what to think of it.


Sir, not long ago there was a young Gentleman here about the Town, who hearing
of her Riches, and knowing this her humor, had almost got her, by
counterfeiting himself to be an old man


I?


O I shall never, I think, forget how he came in a white Perriwig and his false
beard; I cannot almost but laugh, when I think how handsomely he carried the
business, how he made as if his hands trembled, and his head shaked, how he
seemed to be deaf, and have the Gou^, and twenty other Infirmities of age,
insomuch that my Mistress was extremely taken with him


And how came he to miss her?


The strangeliest that ever you heard: for all things were agreed, the very
Writings drawn, and when he came to seal them, because he set his name without
using a pair of Spectacles, she would never see him more


Nay, if she can love an old man so well. --


But here she comes, Sir.


Sister, I desire that you would entertain this Gentleman, Sir Thomas
Cranfield, as my friend


Madam, I shall think it no small happiness to be reckoned amongst the number
of your servants


Sir, for my brothers sake, I shall be glad of your farther acquaintance.


Sister, I am laden with a number of Services to you from your friends in the
Country


How do they all, I pray? Sir Richard Howard, and my Lady Tanfield? --

But, Brother, have you brought up the money I wrote for, you know what
occasions of expense I have had in this Law business


I could not in so short a time, Sister, procure so much as you wrote for; but
I have made a shift to get almost 200 l. though among your Tenants, the rest
they will pay you when you come down, which your friends hope will not be long
first; I promised them to bring you down with me


Ha! Tenants!


But, Sister, I must speak a word to you in private. --


Sir John, I take my leave of you.


What are you going Sir Thomas? I will wait upon you anon at your Lodging.


Madam, your most humble servant.


Stay, what is here? A Mortgage of the Manor of Dove --

A Bond for seven hundred pounds --

A Bond in nine hundred pound to John Tompkins of S. Clements Esquire. That was
her husband suit

Another Mortgage of Lands in Lincolneshire, -- to him too. There is no end of
her Wealth. --

And then the Land they talked of in the Country. --


How now, Sue? what news now?


What do you think?


What, prithee?


Did not you see a gallant Gentleman come with my Mistress her brother?


I, Sir Thomas, I think they called him: What of him?


I dare say, he comes to be a Suitor to my Mistress. -- Somewhat I have
overheard --

If you will but step in here a little, I believe you may hear more.


Sister, you see he is a proper Gentleman, and I can assure you he has almost
seven thousand pounds per annum


Speak no more of him, brother, for I shall never think of him in that Nature.


Why? what is the reason, Sister?


I desire that you would pardon me for that.


I hope you are engaged unto no body?


No, not engaged. -- But --


What is the matter, Sister? Come, let me be partaker of what ever troubles
you. You do not use to be thus strange to me


I do not indeed, but now, me thinks, I have too much cause for me to appear
strange unto my self


Why? what is the matter?


From you (dear brother) I cannot conceal any thing, yet I could wish you could
now guess my thoughts, and look into my mind, and see what strange passions
there have ruled of late, without forcing of me to strain my modesty


What? are you in love with any body? Come, let me know the party, a brothers
advice may do you no hurt


If I should tell, I know you would laugh at me; but truly I shall rather
deserve your pity. --


Come, come, tell me; who is it?


Did not you see an ancient Gentleman with me when you came in?


What, is it any son or kinsman of his?


No, no.


Who then?


I have told you.


Who, that feeble and decrepit piece of age?


Nay, brother. --


That sad effect of some threescore years and ten, that antic relick of the
last Century


Nay, brother, I told you, you would serve me so. --


But, sister, prithee be a little serious. Do thou love him indeed?


Alas, dear brother, it is but too true.


It is impossible.


One would think so indeed.


I grant, you may bear a reverence and regard, as you would to your fathers
ashes, or your Grandfires Tomb


Witness all that are good and just, never a youth of two and twenty stirred
more amorous desires then he has done in me


I see now Sue, thou say true.


Certainly the Villain has bewitched her, could ever woman be thus mad else,
to be in love with age and rottenness, to be in love with a withered carcass,
whom its own soul being weary of, is ready to forsake and leave


Alas, brother, you know I never did affect those vain, though pleasing
braveries of youth, but still have let my mind on the more nobler part of man,
which Age does more refine and elevate; then it does depresse and sink this
same contemptible clod


Well, Sister, to morrow you shall go down with me into the Country; I Will
warrant we shall find them there shall make you forget this same reverend Sir


O never, never.


Do but try. --

I have a Coach here in the Town, come, come, you shall go, I will p^e^ently go
and ^ake order about things.


Now you will believe me another time.


I can scarce believe my self; but is it possible that she should so love me,
and I could never perceive it all this while


Alas, Sir, she is so modest, that I dare swear, except it had been to her
brother, she would have concealed this same passion until it had broke her very
heart


But what had I best to do?


Nay, Sir, you see your danger, if her brother should carry her into the
Country to morrow, how they may work upon her easy nature, I cannot tell


You say true.


Even strike while the iron is hot; for ought I know, if you let this night
pass, you are gone for ever


Do think she would marry me this night then?


That would be somewhat sudden, I must confess, but I dare swear you might
persuade her unto any thing, if you do but take your opportunity when her
Brother is gone


Well, I will try what may be done. --

But, Sweetheart, They were just now talking of Tenants that she had, has she
any Land too in the Country


I, Sir, for my part, came to her since she came to London, and therefore
cannot speak any thing of mine own knowledge, but somewhat I believe I can
guess


Why, I pray?


Sir, every now and then here comes a company of fellows in letherne breeches
with money to my Mistress, and here they keep a talking of Leases, and renewing
of Leases, and Fines; a deuce take them for me, I am sure I am fain to clean
our Dining Room some four or five times a week after them


Say you so? Say you so?


Then (Sir) for a month together about last Lady Day, we lived upon nothing but
Capons that these fellows sent us


You were shrewdly hurt, were you not?


'Twas but the last week that one, she calls him her -- Baily, I think.


I, I, right, right; what of him?


Why he sent her a Gammon of Bacon seasoned with peppercornes, that were due to
her, one from each Farm


I?


And when that fellow comes up to the Town, there is such a talking of Rents,
Quit-rents, Reversions, Harriots, and I know not what all --

There are some other things she has, they use to talk much of, that I have
quite forgot; Stay, -- Mannals I think they call them


Manors, you mean.


I, Manors, Manors, what are they (Sir?) any sort of cattle?


No, no, you Cockney. --

How shall I wallow in Wealth! I shall never be able to ^ame my luxuriant bags.
-- I may found Hospitals, Colleges, or build Churches


Sir, and have them turned to Stables.


Mas, thou say true, Wench. I may make Causeways or build Bridges. --


Well (Sir) you had not best to lose all, while you are a thinking of it.


It Is well said, I will go to her presently.


YOur Physiognomy (Madam) will erect a Monarchy greater then that of the
Ottomans


Lord! What does this mean?

I am confident (Sir) you do but complement.


Complement! No, upon my Honor, Madam; for certainly your beauty was composed
to captivate the world, and amongst the rest, to make me your eternal Bondslave


Truly Sir, I dare not think my self worthy of that honor.


Please your Honor, Madam, to have some Oranges: Please your Honor, dainty,
curious, fine Oranges


Let Us see Woman. -- How many Oranges for two pence?


How many for two pence! -- Take you, you use to come to Hide Park, I Will
warrant. I wonder under what Milk-pail you have been bred


Was there ever such an affront?

What must I do now? May I draw upon a Woman by the rule of Honor? Or must I
kick her?

You dirty whore, you. --


You think your self a pretty fellow in your buttoned cap.


I could wish (Madam) that she had been one that I could have in an honorable
way, sacrificed my dearest blood to your incomparable Beauty


Please your Honor, Madam, curious Apricocks* Please your Honor to buy my
Apricocks


I think, I will not be so affronted again.

Come woman, let us see your Apricocks. What is the price of these two baskets?


They are three shillings a piece, if it please your Honor.


Three shillings a piece! What no more? Have you no better?


If it please your Honor, at the other end there are some that are Crowns a
piece


Are there so? And, I pray, why did not you show them at the first?


Because I did not think you such an Ass.


Please you to choose, Madam. --


I Will have this.


Come, I Will have one too. --

Hold up your basket: There is an Angel, I think.


God bless your Honors. --

And send you more wit. I rose on my right side, I think, to day. --


What do you mean to spend your money thus, Sir?


O God, Madam, were I ma^ter of the Indies, of all the hidden Treasures of the
sea, your Beauty should command it all


Truly, Sir, you make me that I cannot tell what to say. --

But (Sir) had we not best go where the company is again?


I will go see (Madam) whether the Coach be where we left it.


Madam, will it please you to walk, for the Coach is yonder?


-- For you, Lady, are the only she of whom I ever yet could seriously in this
nature think of; And if I shall e're find in you an affection answerable to my
desires, they then will rest, as having attained the chiefest good I e're could
hope for from your Sex


Am I the only she (say you) that you ever could think of? That very thing me
thinks) does make me suspect whatsoever else you have said


It Is true (Lady) I needs must say, that I have seen ma^y a one in whose
enjoyment, perhaps, I could have had no mean content; we might have lived
together with all the usual love, she might have made me a Father, and I have
thought so; and if I should have lost her, I should have thought my self
bereaved of one of those things that serve to pass away a troublesome life, as
good company, or Sack

But one, in admiring of whom I could be content to spend my time, one whom,
rather then to miss, I should run all imaginable hazards, I never yet saw,
till you


Come, fie, fie, Mr. Know-wel. Truly, I did not expect this from you.

Should one of those youths indeed, who then think they show most of
Accomplishment, when they express most Service unto us; not surely that they
have that real value they pretend; but because (as sometimes great Doctors,
upon trifling silly questions, will show their Learning) they judge us to be
convenient properties to try their Wit and Courtship on: Should such a one (I
say) have said so much, I should have esteemed it accordingly

But what your most sober judgment can find out in me, a thing so trifling and
inconsiderable to occasion these kind of words, I do not a little wonder


Lady, do not wrong your self with these mean thoughts, for certainly there is
not that person in the world that I do value like you. I will not so far
trespass on your modesty to tell you why; yet I have not been esteemed to act
things irrational


Value me, Sir! for what?

Me thinks, were I but subject to those general imputations, to which our Sex
is liable, it were enough to extinguish such a thought

You see, Sir, I am a woman, one of the most undervalued Creatures living; we
never yet by any polity were allowed to meddle with any thing but a needle: We
are not esteemed to know ought of rational but our wills; nay, some will not
allow us for to know our wills. And should I but consider my self by what some
Satyrick Wits say of us* I could not but believe my self one of the most
despicable things in Nature


You have indeed no little cause for to quarrel with the general custom that
does put such a difference betwixt you and us. For have we not all the same
rational souls, the same affects and qualities? Nay, I need must say, I have
not seen more acute differencing and discerning spirits, then I have in some
women; nor do I see any reason, but if they should improve and blow those
natural sparks they are endued with, by the same means that we do use
(neglecting those poor mechanic things to which the absurd humor of the world
does usually addict them) but that they would make a greater blaze then the
most eminent of men. And such accomplishments meeting with the usual beauty and
sweetness of their Sex, must needs extremely captivate and ravish, nor would
any thing come so nigh Divinity


Well Sir, Although it were granted that there might be somewhat possible in
woman sitting to be valued, what were that to me? I should no more dare to
believe my self owner of any such thing, then that I did possess the Indies


No!

Could I but upon as good an account believe you ever to be mine, I should
believe my self to possess more then them

Come (dear Lady) will you give me but the least of hopes to enjoy what e're
perfection it be that you are owner of? Shall I think ever to call it mine


Truly (Sir) I think not, for. --


Hold Lady, let me have a little more warning before you intend to give me a
stroke so mortal; do not in one instant make me a thing irrational, of no
design. For since my hopes have once made you their end, there can nothing
surely ever appear to me, so worthy as to fix a thought upon


Sir, you did a little mistake me, for (as I think) I never did yet any thing
that might encourage you to speak in this nature. So truly, thereby I needs
must say, I did not intend to destroy whatsoever hopes you have conceived of
me; for that which I was a going to say, (had you but given me leave) was only
this

Suppose me Mistress of all the Wit and Parts that ever yet was incident to our
Sex

And (now I am supposing of such impossible things) suppose me (as you just now
said) yours; what were that to you more then to all the world? for you could as
well hope to appropriate the Air as such Accomplishments. The Sun it self does
not afford more general and communicative influence then they would do

Nay, perhaps as we now are, you might more enjoy such qualities; for what
would wit in a wife serve for, but to interfere with yours. Nor have they been
esteemed unwise, whom I have heard say, they could well spare all Judgment in
one of that relation, save what were requisite to a handsome dress, or so. --


I am so far, Lady, from thinking so, that were that realwhich you now
supposed, the greatest Epicure could not more enjoy what e're his sensual
appetite does prompt him to, then I should those perfections of your mind; for
then we should not only be linked in that mystical knot, nor with those more
natural ties and charms, as you are woman or fair; but certainly we should
close in that stricter conjuncture of friend and friend, the greatest cement
possible 'twixt humane souls

And where it joines us with the more refined minds, it is a happiness that
the super-errogating Saint in his boldest error could never hope to merit. For
to have one who as my better Genius, might regulate even in their first matter
my imparted thoughts. What can be a greater bliss

Or if I had any thing of worth or value in me, to have such a conscient judge
and witness, would almost imitate the pleasure that some in the thought of an
all-knowing Deity, can in any mis-construed action solace themselves against
the opinion of the world

It Is true, I know some kind of Madam, who perhaps, having some not unhappy
vain which a little too much taking with the world, might drive her into
strange conceits of what she scarce can tell, and make her prove as
troublesome and cross, as sometimes are the winds, and have as various and
fantastic ways: but we should no more thwart or differ from each other, then
truth would do from truth, the ways of judgment and discretion being as
certain and demonstrative: we should anticipate each others thoughts, our
actions would be as harmonious as are those of Ants or Bees, as if by some
secret law of nature we were designed to carry on some common work: what say
you, Lady, should we not? shall I ever enjoy in you this happiness


If not Sir. Your Fancy that has thus largely supplied all my defects, will
easily make good to you a greater loss


Nay, Prithee be as serious as is the love I bear thee; and tell me freely and
plainly what result that which you have observed of me has wrought upon your
thoughts; for this is the only thing by which I must either stand or fall: for
should I by entreaties seek to force your will, 'twould be but vain, since if
you cannot afford, to answer my affection, they must needs make you loath, if
not contemn and scorn me


Shall I answer you then, and will you not be sorry?


Hold, for me thinks I stand with the same pain, that the prisones does, that
is to receive sentence either of life or death; feign would I be out of doubt,
but loath I am to undergo the trial; but speak, for certainly you have no
condemning look


Well then Sir; to be short, if I should say you are a man, like whom, I never
yet saw any; such a one, whom when in my prayers I have thought of man, I have
wished for, and desired; it is a truth Sir, which perhaps, by the exact rule of
wooing you should not yet have known; and now you know it, you may be sorry
that you so easily know it; but I cannot help it


What could I more desire!


Sir, but I believe it is pretty late, wherefore, if you please, let us go to
the Coach again.


It was my better genius surely, put me on this device, it could not else have
fallen out so luckily; for me thinks I have observed a more th^n ordinary
kindness between my Cozen and this Gentleman, since their coming home; and now
I call to mind, this was the man whom she did so commend today, and defend
against us all; I needs must say, that I was much mistaken in him, for surely,
he is one of far more worth then I did take him for to be

Well, if she have any such desires, would heaven inflame them to the height,
and so finish my imperfect hopes, which already do begin to take some shape
and form. --

But here I think she is. --


What, are you come, Affection?


I, is it not time?


And how go now affairs at Hide-Park? what new beauties are there come to
Town, since I have been in the Country? which is the chiefest planet that does
now shine in that round-moving orb of Coaches


You should have asked, what was the newest fashion, who had the finest gown,
or the handsomest dress; for these are things we women only mark: This Gent.
I believe, would better have resolved you that question. --

What say you Mr. Know* well, which was the handsomest Lady that you saw there?


That, Lady, would be a very difficult business to determine, I should rather
choose me a Mrs. by her picture, or as the Italians, they say, do, through a
window, and think my self subject unto less deceit


Why, I pray Sir?


When one sees, Lady, nothing but a face, and that dressed up unto the height,
I might as well Judge of a book by the fine Greek title; the Vardingales had
not so much imposture; give me a place where I may see and Judge of all
dimensions

I remember I marked a Lady there whom I have seen somewhere before, she is
one (Ladies) that has the strangest antic shape as ever nature in her
greatest whimsey was Author of

But as sometimes you shall see a pretty neat device carved on a knotty
crab-tree stick, her face, I must confess, is not much amiss, for as she
ordered the business with her advantageous sitting in the Coach, she was the
only shining planet, as you say, that drew all eyes upon her


No Sir, she was but a false deluding Comet.


I, so she might, for I am sure she has a huge excrescence at her back.


Well, but Mr. Know-well, what say you to the Western Lady that I showed you?


She does well, I must confess, at a distance, but when we came nearer, me
thought she was but ordinary


There was one I told you of, that I said was newly come to the town, is not
she handsome


Handsome?


I will assure you there are some whose opinions are accounted very authentic
in these kind of things, that say so


Surely then I believe they have a mind to try how much their judgments can
impose upon the world


There was a lass in the Coach with the green Livery that you looked much upon.


She had indeed a good complexion, and I believe right; besides, a pretty
innocent look, as if she meant no hurt, and pity it were to do her any. And
although she have some features which, according to the exact rule are not
esteemed handsome, yet certainly, there is somewhat in her face, will force one
to believe them pleasing


Do you remember Sir, she in the cloth of Silver wast-coate, that I bad you
take notice of


Yes, that I do, and truly she will serve well enough, only me thinks she has
a kind of sullen look, as if she would be angry, if the artillery of her eyes
should fail


There was, when I was last in the town, a City Lady, that was much talked of.


O! I wonder how I have forgot her all this while, that was she we overtook,
you eyed her much


I did indeed, because I have heard so much of her; she has a most complete
and perfect beauty, nor can the greatest critic in this kind find any fault
with the least proportion of her face, but yet me thought I was no more taken
with it, then I should with some curious well drawn picture


That Sir, is somewhat strange. --


In my mind, not at all, Lady; for it is not always that we are Governed by
what the general fancy of the world calls beauty; for each soul has some
predominant thoughts, which when they light on ought that strike on them, there
is nothing does m^^e inflame

And as in music, that pleases not most which with the greatest art and skill
is composed; but those aires that do resemb^^ and stir up some dormant passion
to which the mind is addicted. So I believe, never yet was any one much taken
with a face, in which he did not epsy ought that did rouse and put in motion
some affection that has ruled in his thoughts, besides those features, which
only for the sake of common opinion we are forced to say does please


Yonder comes Mr. La-gull, I think.


I will stand aside here a little, then.


Mr. La-gull, your servant.

What? are you come but now?


No, Madam, We staid somewhat the longer by reason of a small accident that
happened


What was that, I pray?


I hope it is not another story of a busk.


This night, Madam, there was a horse-race, on which I had laid a trifling bett
of some forty pounds. Wherefore I being desirous for to see it, (first, craving
pardon of this Lady, for my so rudely leaving her) got upon my Barbary Mare
that my Lacquey had there. And (Madam) there happened to be there a French man,
one who (as I have heard) is a Monsieur of much honor and repute in his
Country: He (Madam) observing me, said I did ride well, and manage my horse
handsomely for an English man; which I over hearing, told him, that I was
transcendently engaged to him for his good opinion of me; but yet I could not
in honor but take notice of the affront he put upon my Country in those words;
wherefore (Madam) I told him, that if he pleased, he should find an English man
could rule a sword as well as a Horse; and upon that (Madam) we drew


There was no hurt done I hope? was there?


Not much, Madam.

Yet I must confess, I made a thrust at him, which he bearing down run quite
through his Porte-canon; And he with a hanger that he had, stroke at my head,
which I could not so fully ward, but that he cut off the button of my Cap; and
then (Madam) we were parted by the company* but he bid me look to hear further
from him, and went his way, and I came back to this same Lady


Truly Sir, your Country cannot but look upon you as one of her chiefest
Champions


O God Madam! the honor of my Country is far dearer to me, then my life. I
should be unworthy to live in it, should I have suffered it to receive such an
affront.


Sir, here is one has brought you a letter.


For me? I Will warrant it is the Gent. I talked of, has sent me a challenge. --
For I have taken order to have one sent, the more to countenance this same
story. --


A challenge say you, is it? pray let me see, I never yet did see the fashion
of a challenge


Nay Madam. --


Come, I will read it.


If you will, I cannot tell how to help it, for I was not born to contradict
fair Ladies wills. --


Stay, What is this? --

Sir, I (according as you desired me) have found out the Gentleman you wot of,
whom I do really find to have much interest in your adversary.


Hold Lady, for this is not a challenge, but a letter of some private
business. --


It Is no matter, now I have begun, I will make an end of it.


Excuse me, Madam.


Why Mr. La-gull, I thought you had not been born to contradict fair Ladies
wills. --


Nay, Madam, I must have it.


Here -- She flings it t^ Crisis. La-gull offers to take it from her with some
rudeness, she striving to keep it, in the midst of the bustle Enter Know-wel


Why, you uncivil fellow, what is the matter?


What, is he here too? how unluckily it falls out? Misfortune on Mis fortune!


Here Mr. Know-well, read this.


Read this! --

But I could by no means prevail with him to be a means of taking your quarrel
up, except you lend him the sum I told you of, which (you to day referring
the matter unto me) I have promised him; and have procured one that will lay
down the money. We shall be all at night at the old place, where I desire you
would not fail, but meet, that we may make an end of the business

Your humble servant Rich. Hadland.




No surely, this is no challenge.


What shall I do? I am disgraced for ever. My honor, my honor and reputation
is lost eternally


Not a whit Sir; for to tell you plainly, there is none here, that I believe,
did ever think you had any to lose


I am abused, some body has abused me with this letter.


You are abused indeed Sir, and will be more, if you do not take heed.


Come Mr. La-gull, you are amongst none but your friends, if you will be ruled
by us, I Will warrant you you shall do well enough yet


You had as good take some counsel now, lest you repent when it is too late.


The truth of it is, Sir, you are happened into the hands of some su^^le youths,
who knowing you to be a man of a fair fortune, never any Merchants
Cash-keeper, or Less of twenty thousand pounds, had more designs on them,
then they have on yo


What would you have me do?


Do? Why, e'ne as those of your temper use to do; leave this town, marry, and
seat your self in the country


Come not up hither, except it be in an Easter Term, or so, to buy your wife a
new gown


Trouble your self no more about these nice and subtle rules of honor, or in
getting a fine affected strain of complement; but if you will needs bu^^e your
brain, you may learn the strange dialect of Hawks and Hounds


Some fine speeches though, you may keep in Lavender, to excuse your Christmas
cheer, or to use in distributing a Feasant of your own taking


You need not then be so inquisitive after the modes and fashions; a fine gaudy
suit or two to wear on Market days, or in the assize-week, will be well enough


In stead of roaring night and day in Taverns, or venturing with a company of
Cheats, at some Ordinary, the price of a Farm, keep your drinking matches of
tubs of Ale, and your bowling days, where your Crown rubbers will not do you
much prejudice


And when you have a mind to play the good husband, a nursery, or a hop-ground
may sind you good employment


You may learn to inoculate, and if any Ladies come to visit you, a dish of
fruit, with a story how you your self did graft it, may serve for all your
costly treatments here


Upon a rainy day, or when you have naught else to do, you may read Sir Walter
Raleigh, Lord Bacons Natural History, the Holy War, and Browns Vulgar Errors.
You may find too some stories in the English Eusebius, and the Book of Martyrs,
to hold discourse with the Parson on a Sunday dinner


Sometimes to your wife you may read a piece of Shak-speare, Suckling, and Ben.
Johnson too, if you can understand him


You may read the Scout, and Weekly Intelligence, and talk politickly after it.
And if you get some smattering in the Mathematics, it would not be amiss, the
Art of dyalling, or to set your clock by the quadrant, and Geography enough to
measure your own land


Thus you may employ your self, and do the business that you came for into the
world, uphold your name and family, make your son somewhat at the better
Gentleman, in making his pedigree the longer by one


I am highly engaged to you for this advice, and hence forward I shall study to
observe it.


Is not Mr. Know-well here?


My name is Know-well, friend, what would you have with me?


O, is it so? Then pray come along with me.


With you? for what?


Come away, I say, without dispute, for I am a man of Authority.


Cry mercy, for I might very well have mistaken you. But I pray, what is the
matter


The matter? as if you did not know. --


Not I, nor can I guess.


You do not know I Will warrant, one Mr. -- Well bred, I think they call him.


Why, I pray, Mr. Constable, what of him?


I have some little acquaintance with him.


But what of him?


Why, what does it concern you, I wonder, that you are so hasty to know?)


Nothing, but that this Gentleman has killed him a little, he is only dead.


Dead!


I, as a door nail, I Will warrant you by this time; I am sure I left him
gasping almost two hours ago


Dead!


I, as a Herring, I dare lay my life, by this time.


How do you Cozen? are you not well?


A kind of a fainting fit that uses to take me sometimes, since I had my Ague
in the Country, it will presently over again


What can be the meaning of this? I have not seen him to day.


Come, come, I am not to dispute that with you. -- You did not send him a
challenge neither? did you


I, a challenge! certainly you are mistaken.


Yes I Will warrant, did not these eyes see it taken out of his pocket? but if I
am mistaken, then pray come along with me without more ado


What strange unlucky accident has happened, that has thus blasted all my hopes
that did begin to bud, and made that occasion of my endless grief, which I had
thought had been the way to what I had most desired.


This is a sad story; we had best to follow and inquire further into it. --
Stay, Now I think of it, I will go to his l^dging; Prethy Mr. La-gull, go bid
your man get a Coach.


Malicious wit could never have devised such a plague. -- Fight I dare not. --
'Slid, but here he comes I think, what shall I do? I will walk on, perhaps he
may not see me. --


My man is out of the way, who shall I get to get a Coach? -- But yonder is
Caster, certainly he cannot but see me, yet he takes no notice of me; perhaps
it is the mode not to take notice after a challenge: I will do so too.


Nay Mr. La-gull, good Mr. La-gull, I did but. --

'Slid, I thought he had been here. --

What a strange kind of thing is this same fear, that does not only improve
real dangers, but raises fantastic ones, where there are none at all.


Surely he called me.


Thou prodigious and unruly monster, could I but quell thee!


He talks terribly, certainly he does intend to fight presently.


Look, here he is again, if my fear do not again deceive me. I had e'ne best
to tell him the truth, yield up my sword, and put my self to his mercy, I care
not upon what terms


It Is so -- he draws. -- Hold. -- But they say he has no mercy, -- I had then
as good die according to the rule of honor.


Hold, hold, I yield. Murder. Murder. --


Give me your sword then;


Here, here. --


Is it no more to fight then so? is this the thing all this while I have been
so affrighted with? have I so easily mastered such a man? a man so valiant as
they said he was? whom then need I fear

Me thinks I could now fight with any body, would any living thing but affront
me.


What have I done? For they say he is like to dye. He was too (as I have since
heard) a very accomplished man; Nay, certainly I was much deceived in him, for
his carriage had much of spirit in it, and a Gentleman. --

Well, little did I think I should ever have been compelled unto these kind of
courses; and nothing does more vex me, then that I am fain to consort my self
with such unworthy things, which I should abhor, did not my fortunes, broken by
these late Wars, force me to make them the instruments of my subsistence, --
One of them though I would be now glad to light on, if I could tell where. --
But yonder I think he comes.

Why, how now Caster? Where have thou been? For I have been looking for thee
almost all over the Town, I think


All over the Town! You might have chanced to have looked beyond China and
Iapan, and not have found me

Well, -- I thank God I am here now, but I was like to have been further then
ever Drake was, by this time


Why, Prithee, where?


Where? Why, in that Terra incognita, the other world.


The other world! What would thou have done there? they do not there play at
dice: or if they do, old Nick, I doubt, would go nigh to be the better Cheat.
--

But what was the matter?


Why, I met with the dreadful blade. --


Whom do you mean?


Whom should I mean? the terrible Squire La-gul.


He has not spoiled all now, I hope. --

Well, and what then?


What then! He drew, and came upon me like any lightning, but my discreet and
timely submission, together with the coming of some company, did a little
assuage his fury


Did you submit unto him, say you?


What should I do else?


If I did not think so --

I could now kick thee, could I but afford to take the pains. --

Thou have spoiled all that we have been plotting of this fortnight, when we
had just brought it to perf^ction


You would have had me (I Will warrant) have been such an Ass, as to have fought
and ventured my life


Fought! Thou needst not so much as have made a mouth, rowned, or put thy self
into a fighting posture


What should I have done then unto such a son of Thunder?


A son of Thunder! a more arrant Coward then thy self, if possible.


Did not you tell me he was another kind of man?


I did indeed in jest to fright you a little, but we this night were to have
had Two hundred pounds of him to have made you his friend


Well, this it is, when you will put me on things that are out of my Element; I
could have been a Cheat this seven years, and have done well enough


Well, I have a business for you to do, which if you will do handsomely, you
will redeem my opinion


Is it to fight?


No.


Then I Will warrant you.


-- BUt surely you were not always of this mind.


I needs must say, I was not; for it is not long since I did look on you, as
one with whom rather by the Decree of Heaven, then my own desires, I was
ordained to live as wife. Although (I must confess) I never saw any thing so
unpleasing in you, but that (if such a thing had been) I could have afforded
you whatever love and duty you could have expected from one of that relation;
yet this is more then I am sure you could promise to your self from any thing I
ever showed to you; But the various accidents of this day has so fully
represented to me a man with whom my soul would more agree, that in him I am
resolved to rest as to these kind of thoughts


Nay, Lady, if you be in earnest, even as you please; for I would this wound
would but admit as easy cure as any you have given me. And I cannot tell what
out of the height of Courtship I may have said, but I believe you do not think
I was born to die of love

Yet I know not, for the story that you have told me of your Cozen, has raised
some kind of thoughts in me that I never had before. And if this that she has
done be out of love to me (as it cannot but deserve, so) it must needs cause in
me an answerable affection


Well, Sir, the Gentleman is by this time before the Justice; it is more then
time that I went and informed them of the truth. --

But I had almost forgot: Here is a ring Sir, you gave me to day, which I
desire you would take back


Excuse me, Lady, -- It is not of that value.


Believe me, Sir, I will not keep it.


Well, then I will tell you what you shall do; even present it to your Cozen in
my name as an earnest of my love. -- I hope it will not be long, before I may
be in that condition, as to wait upon her my self, for I do feel my self much
amended now my wound is stopped, my illness only proceeding from some loss of
blood


Well, Sir, I wish you a speedy recovery.


Nay, Lady, I may wait upon you to the door.


Come, here they are, what will you do?


Let Us see. --

Faith, all our old devices, false cubed Dice with Quicksilver, the boxes with
springs, besides all the other Arts of the hand, are grown as common as the
Juglers box


They are only fitting to cozen Prentices of their Christmasse Box-money.


What say you to that which I told you of the other day?


The business with the Loadstone?


That I believe is not very common, nor is it easy to be discovered; but you
know we are not now provided for that


Then you must even see what you can do with your old Tricks.


These Lads I am afraid will go nigh for to discover them.


No I Will warrant you, they are drunk up unto a handsome pin. -- Besides, let
the worst come to the worst, I will be here hard by. --


Mr. La gul! Your servant; I am glad to hear of your good success. They say,
you have gained a great deal of Honor to day


-- Take your Honor for me; I am not now for Honor, but for fighting.

And first I will begin with you, as the principal man that has abused me.


This is brave, I vow, --

What is the matter with him? --

Is your name La-gul?


Yes, I am the self same man, only I do a little better understand my self,
what an Ass you have made me all this while. And to be short, I here demand of
you satisfaction, you being the only man that either dares, or is worthy to
give it. --

Come draw, for I am resolved.


As I live, I like your resolution howsoever.


Hadland, Hadland, help, help.


Why how now, Sirs, what is the matter?


They are Cheats, arrant Cheats.


Cheats, -- Cheats, they have cozened us of almost 100 l. but at the last we
caught them


Rogues, Cheats, give me my money, or I will beat out your brains.


Come let them alone since they have made a couple of fools of you, do not you
make your selves more by keeping such a doings. -- 'Slid they have cozened me of
at the least 300 l. within this fortnight, and yet you hear me say never a word


Fools of us, do you say!


I, most notorious fools and coxcombs; nothing more plain, for thus I will
prove it: You came in with money in your purses, but this money you have lost,
and are like to go away without it, therefore you are fools


I deny your Minor, for I say, they have not lost it, but have played with
Cheats, and have been cozened of it, therefore they are not fools


It Is true, they have played with Cheats, and have been cozened, but therefore
they are fools


Shall we endure this?


But they did not know them to be Cheats, and therefore they are not fools.


It Is true, they did not know them to be Cheats; but therefore they are fools.

What say you? are you not Gentlemen?


Shall we lose our money and be abused too? you uncivil, rude fellow.


Nay, if you be thereabouts, here is an Argument to prove you fools that you
have not seen. And this shall make you confess.


Nay Gentlemen, two to one is too much, there shall be no unequal doings.


This act has reconciled me to thee; 'twas bravely done, I vow, and like thy
self; for whatsoever courses you have run of late, I have not long since heard
much of your worth and value


The truth of it is, I have done some things, more for to satisfy my wants,
then through my own desires. And I am now grown so weary of this kind of life,
that I could wish any other employment, though never so mean, that would but
maintain me but as a Gentleman


I Will tell you what, I think I shall now shortly marry, and settle my self in
the Country; if you will come and live with me, and bear me company, I will
continue what I give you, and more will add (if you do desire) and whatsoever
is past, I will forget, and never think of, except it be over a bottle of Sack
when we have a mind to be merry


Your offer is noble, and if a design that I have in hand, do chance to fail,
may possibly be opportune. However, as it cannot but much engage me, so I shall
endeavor to show how sensible I am of this your Civility. Nor --


Hold, for I am now grown quite out of conceit with Complements; if you will
come, I will assure you, you shall be welcome. --

And as for you, my brace of Asses, now I hope you are not so furious but that
one may in sober sadness prove you a couple of fools for venturing of your
money upon uncertain chance


I hope not so.


Yes, but I will, and because they shall not take it ill, I will assure you it
is no more then what a sober Gentleman proved me for the selfsame cause not
above half an hour since


That (Sir) in my mind, if you be in earnest, is somewhat strange; for although
that the chance of dice is certain in it self, and does (as all other things of
chance) depend on sure and natural causes; yet these causes either being
unknown to us, or else not in our power, their effects must needs to us, before
they come to pass, be also unknown; and from this ignorance, if thereby we are
concerned, must needs arise a certain strife and Altercation of hopes and
fears, which with no little pleasure does affect the soul

Now Sir, all pleasures by providence being created for our better being, may
rationally enough be (if but discreetly) used

From hence it follows, that one may not only play at D^ce, but also venture
so much upon their chance, whereby these passions may arise


It Is true, Sir, if one venture no more; but to venture so much, as that the
loss thereof may m^ke any considerable alteration in ones fortune, cannot but
be (as he said) the height of folly


Why so, Sir* For have I not as probable and rational hopes for to improve, as
to impair the same, Chance in reason being supposed impartial unto none


But, Sir, then said he, ones estate and fortune, being the principal thing
that makes one to be valued in the world, I cannot certainly more rationally
imply the force and vigor of my wit, then about that

Now (Sir) in a thing that so much concerns me, wholly to balk whatsoever
benefit my judgmen^ might afford, and put my self into such a way, where the
starkest ^ool has as much advantage as I, and more too, if the Proverb be t^u^
must needs, in any sober man's opinion render me a fool. --


Well, Gentlemen, I can no longer help you, but that I see there is a necessity
you will be concluded fools


Well then my couple of fools, adieu, and here also I do take my leave of
whatsoever folly I have been guilty of. --

Stay, there was a pair of Knaves too, that I should have bid God bu'y; but
it is no matter, I shall see them again when I next come to Town

For as long as London City does endure,

In it a knave, as well as fool, to find you shall be sure.


That (Sir) is no marvel; for fools and knaves are the two main springs on
which not only that, but all the world does move; he that would have none of
these, encounters providence, and would overturne the policy of the world: were
all things of one temper, the Universe would not subsist one minute: were all
men wise, the world would be at a stand, whilst each do prove unmalleable unto
others designs

Fools and Knaves are the two Poles on which the wheels of Fortune turn: It Is
these make Riches, Honor, with a healthful course to ebb and flow through all
the world, which else would rot and putrify in some particular names and
families


But I shall be staid for, for I have appointed to meet at a certain place.


Your servant


Come my Chuck, now thou art mine, and whatsoever is in this house is thine.


But when my brother knows this, he will never endure me for serving him so.


It Is no matter, so long as thou have my love.


I Sir, if I were assured of that, I would despise all the world besides; but I
doubt I have too much cause to fear, that it is my Wealth you have married, and
not me


But you shall have no such cause, I Will warrant you. --

O my dear Honey, I could wish that thou were worth never a groat, that thou
might see how I love thee


Sir, there is the Constable without, he has brought a Gentleman.


What? Cannot he let me be quiet on my Wedding Day.


Come Mr. Constable, what is the matter?


Why, Sir, an't please your Worship, I have reprehended a man upon suspicion of
murder


Of murder! God forbid man, I hope not so.


Look you (Sir) I do but charge him of suspicion of murder, I do not lay flat
murder to his hands: -- I Will warrant you I know what I do


Well, but how stands the case? What witness have you of it?


If it please your Honorable Worship, that which I have to say against this
Gentleman under correction, in brevity is only this


Nay, an't like your Worship, I saw the first beginning, therefore, I hope you
will give me leave to speak first


Come on then friend, you look like an honest fellow; what are you?


An't like your Worship, I am by Trade a Blacksmith. I was a Prentice in
Fetter-lane, and have been a man for my self ever since the last great
Sickness, which is some thirty years ago, I think, for I am sure our Ned was
born the year after, and he is nine and twenty now this next long Vacation


Well, but what can you say to the business?


Why, an't like your Worship, I this Afternoon, after I had bid my wife lay
down the shoulder of Mutton* that (an't like your Worship) I bought in the
morning, I went out into the fields (an't like your Worship) to take a turn or
two to get me a stomach. --

But I had almost forgot one main thing, for as I was going, I met with an old
companion of mine, one Will. Freeman by name. -- An't like your Worship, I tell
you no lie, for as they say, Tell the truth and shame the Devil


Well, but what then, friend?


Why, An't like your Worship, honest Will said I, it was a merry old world when
you and I were Prentices together in Fetterlane. And upon that, (an't like your
Worship) he would needs have me go spend my two pence with him


Well, but come to the point, what do you know concerning this Gentleman?


Nay, by your Worships favor, I am bound to speak the truth, and the whole
truth. -- But stay, where was I


Your friend and you were a going to drink, you said.


O I, and then (an't like your Worship) we went to the Ca^ and Fiddle, and when
we had drunk our flaggon^ a piece, and we were just a coming away, in came a
neighbor of mine, -- stay, -- I shall hit on his name presently


Well, it is no matter for his name, -- but what of him?


An't like your Worship, he would needs make us stay the drinking of his
flaggon too; and by that time that was done, an't like your Worship, I began to
think the shoulder of Mutton might be overroasted, and therefore I made as much
haste home as I could; and as I was coming along by the wall, imagining no
hurt, nor thinking of no harm, O I saw the saddest and lamentable sight. --


What was that?


I never saw so much all the days of my life.


But what was it?


And I hope I shall never see the like again.


Nay, what was it?


Why, An't like your Worship, I saw a proper, goodly young Gentleman, as one
shall see in a year and a day, lie in the most yearnful condition, all in gore
blood, that it would have grieved any heart to have seen the like; and then
this same young man came. --


And what can you say friend? I think I have seen you som^where; is not Mr.
Du-cape the Mercer your Master


If it please your honorable worship, I am resident with Mr. Du-cape upon the
account of a Journeyman


Cry mercy, but what say you?


Why, if it please your honorable worship, as I was going a long upon a very
civil account, to carry a piece of Satin to a person of Honor, in the Peazza,
in Lincolnes Inn fields, just under the wall, I chanced to cast my eyes and
view the aforesaid Gent. whose name is Mr. Well-bred, in the self same
condition as this man has before specified and declared, and I upon that
account deeming him to be dead, did debate with my self upon what account the
said Manslaughter should happen; but I approaching nearer, did descry him to
be one that had been a customer to my Master, and I upon that account knowing
his lodging, did desire this same man that upon that account he would be
isntrumental in conveying him thither. And when upon that account we began to
stir him, his wound upon that account began to bleed with a most extreme
violence, in so much that I seeing his handkerchiefe, hang out of his pocket,
did upon that account judge it requisite to pull it out, to help stop his
wound; and pulling it out, I chanced upon that account to pull out a letter,
which this man desiring me to read --


You may see that some are wiser then some.


-- Upon that account I read it, and finding it to be a challenge, upon that
account did I estimate this Gentleman to have fought a duel


Where is the letter?


Here, if it please your honorable Worship.


Read it Goos-quill.

Goos-quill reads. -- Sir, I cannot but as I am a Genleman take notice of the
affront you put on me, in pretending to Mistress Crisis, to whom none living
does owe more service then my self; wherefore I desire that you would
hence-forward desist, or else meet me at the back side of Islington, with your
friend and a Rapier, where I shall in the same manner attend you, about five of
the clock. In the mean while, I rest


will these bloody and inhumane duells never be left off? shall we never but
be thus barbarous one to another? as if we were not men, but Butchers, Turks or
Tartars

What say you Sir, are not you the man that killed him? do you not know that
blood requires blood


Surely Sir there is some great mistake, for my part I have not seen the
Gentleman this day


It will be well if that will serve your turn; I think the matter cannot be
more clear; Come Goos-quill make a Mittimus presently


Sir, If you please, I shall produce some, in whose company I have been all
this afternoon.


Hold, hold, I beseech you Sir, let him stay a little.


Mrs. Crisis! how does your father, my very good neighbor?


Very well Sir, he will be here shortly.


But what is the matter, can you say any thing in this business?


Sir, only this, the Gentleman that Mr. Know-well here is supsed to have
killed, is not dead


How! not dead?


No Sir, He was only through much loss of blood, fainted away for a time; but
now Sir, he is very well again, neither did he give him the wound that he has,
but he says he had it in a quarrel that happened between him, and some that he
met in the fields


That is strange.


Sir, If you will have but a little patience, there will be some here
immediately that will clear all things to you


Well then, stay a little.


What, must he not be hanged then?


I Will warrant that Gentlewoman has begged him.


She must be a pure virgin if she have.


They say he has bought his life for a thousand pounds, and then he to have a
lease of it for fourscore years


There is a fine device indeed; this it is to be a Gentleman, I Will warrant one
of us should have been hanged without more ado


Bear back there. --


But Mr. Quorum, I hear you have stolen a wedding to day.


Such things will be sometimes; She was a fortune merely cast upon me.


But shall not I have the happiness to see your Bride in the mean time?


Yes that you shall.

Goos-quill, go and desire your Mistress to come in.


Speak but one word, you rogue, and I will cut your throat.


Witness. Surely I should know her. I, that is she without doubt.


Nay, It Is I.


Do you know my wife?


I have a little reason, for I am sure she ows my Master almost (...) pound.


50 pound! that is nothing; -- but I hope thou do not owe many such debts,
Chuck


Why, what if I do?


Nay, nothing, but I hope not so. --


What, am I examined already?


Be not angry Love, -- for I know thou have wherewithal to pay them.


Have I so? Were I disposed, how could I laugh to see how thou art cozend!


Ha! Cozend!


I cozened, thou old doting fool: could you ever imagine any thing else?


Hey da!


Nay, but Honey, what do you mean? you are not in earnest, are you?


In earnest? Do you think I am not? could you ever be so mad, as to think that
I in my heat and strength of years could ever do^e on thy dull frosty carcass


Oh, oh, oh, oh.


Do you think that I would mix my blood with thy cold phlegmatic, gou^y
humors, had it not been to raise my sinking fortune, and to keep me from those
extremities of poverty, that did daily threaten me


Oh I am undone, I am undone, undone.


And yet had my condition been ten times worse, were I to be tied only to thy
bed, I should repent the change


A brave Girl I vow.


For I already do begin to feel those warm desires that thou this many a year
never have been able to satisfy


Come, Master Know-well, let us go into the next room, she will make me
blush' else. --


What, are you going Sir, I hope now you know the house, I shall see you here
sometimes, our years indeed would somewhat suit, and what ever we should chance
to do, here is one must father all


O impudence!


O patience, patience, patience, I shall run mad else, mad, mad, mad.


Now Sir, my revenge is perfect; do you not know me?


Mr. Had-land!


I, Do you not remember how some seven years ago you took the forfeiture of my
Lands that were mortgaged to you, and ever since have unjustly kept me from
them


O, I do remember, and confess this is a judgment, a Judgment.


I Will warrant her she is a judgment worse then either fam^^ sword or the
pestilence, or I am deceived.


You have wronged me, for I say mine was the first turn.


Peace.


Peace, you whore! I will not hold my peace.


What, shall I be called whore in mine own house? out you roq^^ Mr. Constable,
I charge you to turn him out


He turn me out! -- stir but one inch you rogue, and you stir your last.

And now I say, you are a whore, and a most damned whore.

And Sir, nothing so much grieves me, as that I have been the cause of helping
you to this same strumpet


O Sir, what is she? what is she? let me know the worst, for I am prepared.


That which I know of her, Sir, is this; I was first acquainted with her in the
army, where I will assure you she was accounted a very necessary piece of
ammunition, in some five nights, I think, she would serve all our troop; since
(Sir) she has lived about the town, no small sinner, she has been as common
as a Hackny Coach, and much about the same price, two shillings the first hour,
and one shilling an hour after, as long as you will: she is as prostituted as
some modern Works, only they are spread upon the stalls in the day, and she
in the night

Hold her. --

And Sir, if the knowledge of men be the chiefest wisdom, believe she is not
unwise, for in them she is not a little experienced;she will tell you (I
believe) the difference betwixt the melancholy, and the sanguine, the fair, or
the black haired youth: she could perhaps from her own knowledge, mend the
observations of Culpepper, or Aristotle's problems, tell who does afford most
pleasure* the hot Italian, or the tough Germain, the nimble Frenchman, or the
grave Spaniard


Why, you villain you, if through the frailty of my youth I have committed any
of these kind of things, must every rogue tell me of it


On I go for all this -- And Sir, about a year ago in this service, she got a
certain mischance, that you may guess, insomuch, that what with her expenses
to the Surgeon and Apothecaries, together with the intermitting of her trade,
she was reduced to much poverty, and had incurred many debts


Debts!


I, debts of all sorts, from her Mercer to her Milk-maid, all which have been
some while forborne through the expectation of your paying them


Oh, oh, oh, what shall I do? here Goos-quill, take my knife, I don't know what
I may do else


Believe me (Sir) you will have a very charitable employment of it, you will
pay many a pound that for a long while has been accounted desperate; but for
you (Sir) many a poor man might have been undone


This (Sir) will be almost as good as founding Colleges, or building Churches.


And although you build no Hospitals, yet she may chance to find you employment
for Surgeons


You may in time to come, repair and make bridges for your nose.


O thou damned perfidious whore.


O Sir, she is perfidious indeed, if you know how she has served me.


O How, how, how? let me hear, it will be some comfort to me to know any body
else that has been cozend by her besides myself


Why (Sir) this Gentleman and I, (although for my part I must confess, I do
repent of what I have done) did much assist her in the accomplishing of this
her design on you, for which in gratitude to us, and also in respect of your
years, she did agree, that we two should have a certain kind of employment
(Sir) an ancient Roman office called Adjutores thori, conjunctim and divisim,
execute per vices, or by turns; And (Sir) by the bargain I was to have the
first turn; but she (Sir) not minding the premises, fraudulently and
maliciously, against all equity, justice, and good conscience, and against the
true intent and meaning of the parties, has let this Gentleman --


I that she has, I Am sure; when you sent me for her, I caught them both upon
the bed


Oh, oh, I shall never be able to endure: O give me my knife again, O give me
it, I say


You had best, and be accessory to his death.


Well, I am resolved on it; I know what I will do.


Come, let us follow him, he may do himself some mischief else.


Which way went he?


I cannot tell.


Up stairs, I think.


Go after him, for Gods sake, and see whether you can find him.


with you. Mr. Constable, I charge you for to seize upon her.


Hold, hold.


Why?


This is my reason;

Was not I the man that married you?


Nay, Sir, it is a plain case, yours was clearly no marriage.


Nay, then I see I am cozened.


You are indeed, Sir, I hope, for we have taken a great deal of pains in vain
else; I am sure we have been plotting this same business any time this month


Well, I do yield my self cozened, and am glad it is no worse. --

And now Mr. Had land, I see you have wit to get an Estate, I hope you will
have wit to keep it. You are one, I must confess, of whose good parts I have
heard diverse times, and you shall shortly find, you have no more then I can
well afford you


And now, Sir, here the Gentleman has made a shift to come hither in a Coach,
that I was supposed to have killed


And here I do acquit him. --

I must confess, I had a challenge from him; but going for to meet him, I met
with some other Gentleman, between whom and my self there chanced a certain
quarrel, in which I got the wound


I challenged you! Certainly. --


Sir, do not wonder any longer, for I will resolve the doubt. --

This Gentleman was this afternoon to go to a certain place, whither, if he
had gone, I had been for ever lo^t; wherefore I upon the sudden, not thinking
of a better way, sent him that Challenge in your name, only thereby to hinder
his going, -- for which, Sir, I beg your pardon


Which I durst warrant, if it be but for my sake, you shall obtain.


Madam, you are so far from wanting pardon for what you have done, that to you
I owe whatsoever happiness I do expect in this same Lady


If, Sir, you owe any thing to me, I shall look for satisfaction only in this
same Gentleman, for whose sake I did what I did


I shall be, Lady, so far from quitting others scores, that what I owe you on
mine own account, while I live, I shall never clear


Well, Mr. Had-land, I cannot but blush when I think what a part you have made
me act to day


Thou have done that this day (my Dear) that will eternally oblige me.


Madam, I hope you will pardon what I said today, knowing to what end it was
spoken; for there is not that Lady in the world of whom I have more honorable
thoughts, then I have of you


I am sure I never gave you cause to have other.


How now Sirs? What would you have?


Sir, we come to demand your assistance against a couple of knaves that are
here, that this afternoon have cheated us of almost a hundred pounds


Which be they?


Here is one. --


And this is the other.


Have they cheated you, say you?


Yes that they have.


What say you, Gentlemen?


Your Worship (I hope) by experience knows, that such a thing may not be
altogether impossible


Well, Gentlemen will you refer the business to me, upon that condition, that
I do please you all


I, Sir, upon that condition; but we shall not be pleased without our money.


Why, then I order you to give them their money.


But then we shall not be pleased.


Yes, but you shall: for now I am resolved upon a design, which I hope will be
as good as building Hospitals

Gentlemen, by the carriage of this business, I see you have more in you then
ever I did take you for to have. And although you have been wild in your time,
yet now I believe you would know how to value an estate

First therefore, as for you Mr. Had- Land, what you have gotten by this device
from me, I freely will let you enjoy

And for these Gentlemen, I will give them that which shall maintain them like
themselves without these shifts

To be short, Gentlemen, I have an Estate and never a child, and if you
henceforward do nothing that may displease me more then this your days work
has done, I shall not be wanting in any thing that you may expect from a
father. What, does this please you


Beyond our expectation.


We, Sir, shall never be able to deserve this.


Come, come, you have deserved it already.


What strange accidents have happened this day!


O I, it is true, I did not think of it.

Mr. Hadland, there is a Supper ready within, which I did cause to be provided
as for my Wedding Supper; but since you have got my Bride, you must even take
the Supper too

Gentlemen, will you please to walk?


Then here we do begin the round; tomorrow my daughter and this Gentleman say,
you must be at my house


The next day after I do invite you.


And I the next day after that.


March then in, and as you your Weddings make, In the same order now your
places take.


Page 29. lin. ult. add, I am resolved. p. 29. l. 20. dele [!], after the word,
Fight. p. 41. for Act III, read Act IV. p. 45. l. 4. after themselves, add
with. p. 64. l. 29. after believe, add, me


